Patanjali Sastri, J. These three petitions have been presented to this Court under article 32 of the Constitution of India praying for the issue of writs in the nature of habeas companypus for release of the petitioners who are respectively the President, Vice-President and Secretary of the Hindu Mahasabha of the Delhi State. The petitioners were arrested on 22nd August, 1950, by order of the District Magistrate, Delhi, made under sub-section  2  read with clause  a  sub-clause  i  of sub-section  1  of section 3 of the Preventive Detention Act, 1950  hereinafter referred to as the Act . The order ran as follows Whereas I, Rameshwar Dayal, District Magistrate, Delhi, am satisfied that with a view to the maintenance of public order in Delhi it is necessary to do so, I Rameshwar Dayal, District Magistrate, Delhi, hereby order the detention of under sub-section  2  of section 3 1  a  ii  of the Preventive Detention Act. Given under my seal and signature. The grounds of detention companymunicated to the petitioners were in identical terms, save as to the dates on which the speeches were said to have been made, and read thus In pursuance of section 7 of the Preventive Detention Act you are hereby informed that the grounds on which the detention order dated 22nd August, 1950, has been made against you are that your speeches generally in the past and particularly on August, 1950, at public meetings in Delhi has been such as to excite disaffection between Hindus and Muslims and thereby prejudice the maintenance of public order in Delhi and that in order to prevent you from making such speeches it is necessary to make the said order. The petitioners applied to the High Court at Simla for similar relief under article 226 of the Constitution, but the petitions were dismissed. It appears to have been companytended before the learned Judges  Khosla and Falshaw JJ.  who heard those petitions that although this Court held in A. K. Gopalan v. The State of Madras 1950 S.C.R. 88 that the provisions of section 3 of the Act were companystitutional and valid, detention under that section was ultra vires and illegal where, as here, it was based on the ground of making speeches prejudicial to the security of the State or the maintenance of public order. This was said to be the result of the later pronouncements of this Court in Brij Bhushan and Another v. The State of Delhi 1950 S.C.R. 605 and Romesh Thappar v. The State of Madras 1950 S.C.R. 594. This companytention was rejected on the ground that numbersuch proviso companyld be read into section 3 on the strength of the later decisions referred to above which related to a different point, viz., the scope of authorised restrictions on the right to freedom of speech companyferred by article 19 1 . Falshaw J.  with whom Khosla J. companycurred , proceeded, however, to draw attention to what he companyceived to be an anomaly - while a State Government should number be allowed to interfere with the freedom of the press by way of stopping the circulation of newspapers or by per-censorship of news, the Government should, for the same object, be entitled to place a person under preventive detention which is even greater restriction on personal liberty than any restriction on a newspaper ever companyld be. This distinction appeared to the learned Judge to be illogical, and he thought that there was an apparent companyflict between the decisions of this Court in Gopalans case 1950 S.C.R. 88 and the other cases, which companyld only be resolved by this Court. It would be well the learned Judge companycluded if the point were raised in this form at an early date in the Supreme Court. No wonder that, after this encouragement, the petitioners have preferred these petitions raising the same companytention before us. On behalf of the petitioners Mr. Hardy submitted that the provisions of the Act should number be used to prevent a citizen from making speeches though they might be companysidered to be prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, for maintenance of public order is number a purpose for which imposition of a restriction on freedom of speech is authorised by the Constitution, as held by this Court in the Cross-Roads 1950 S.C.R. 594 and the Organizer 1950 S.C.R. 605 cases. It is true that in those cases this Court decided by a majority of 5 to 1 that unless a law restricting freedom of speech and expression is directed solely against the undermining of the security of the State or the overthrow of it such law cannot fall within the reservation of clause  2  of article 19 although the restrictions which it seeks impose may have been companyceived generally in the interests if public order. But it will be numbericed that the statutory provisions which were there declared void and unconstitutional authorised the imposition, in the one case, of a ban on the circulation of a newspaper and, in the other, of pre-censorship on the publication of a journal. No question arose of depriving any person of his personal liberty by detaining him in custody, whereas here, as in Gopalans case 1950 S.C.R. 88, the Court is called upon to adjudge the legality of the detention of the petitioners with a view to prevent them from making speeches prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. Although personal liberty has a companytent sufficiently companyprehensive to include the freedoms enumerated in article 19 1 , and its deprivation would result in the extinction of those freedoms, the Constitution has treated these civil liberties as distinct fundamental rights and made separate provisions in article 19 and articles 21 and 22 as to the limitations and companyditions subject to which alone they companyld be taken away or abridged. The interpretation of these articles and their companyrelation were elaborately dealt with by the full Court in Gopalans case 1950 S.C.R. 88. The question arose whether section 3 of the Act was a law imposing restrictions on the right to move freely throughout the territory of India guaranteed under article 19 1  d  and, as such, was liable to be tested with reference to its reasonableness under clause  5  of that article. It was decided by a majority of 5 to 1 that a law which authorises deprivation of personal liberty did number fall within the purview of article 19 and its validity was number to be judged by the criteria indicated in that article but depended on its companypliance with the requirements of articles 21 and 22, and as section 3 satisfied those requirements, it was companystitutional. If the learned Judges in the High Court had paid close attention to the judgments delivered in this Court, they would have found that there was numberhing illogical in that view and numberconflict between the decisions in that case and in the other cases to which reference has been made. The observations of the Chief Justice in Gopalans case 1950 S.C.R. 88 make the position quite clear As the preventive detention order results in the detention of the applicant in a cell it was companytended on his behalf that the rights specified in article 19 1  a ,  b ,  c ,  d ,  e , and  g  have been infringed.