CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION. Civil Appeal No. 52 of 1954. Appeal by Special Leave granted by this Court on the 25th January, 1954, from Judgment and Order dated the 23rd May, 1953, of the Election Tribunal, Himachal Pradesh, Simla, in Election Petition No. 14 of 1952. Hardayal Hardy and R. C. Prasad for the appellant. Ved Vyas  S. K. Kapur and Naunit Lal, with him  for respondent No. 1. 1954. May 25. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by VENKATARAMA AYYAR J.-This is an appeal against the order of the Election Tribunal, Himachal Pradesh, dismissing Election Petition No. 14 of 1952. On 12th October, 1951, five candidates  respondents 1 to 5 herein  were duly numberinated for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Himachal Pradesh for the Rohru Constituency in Mahasu District. The polling took place on 23rd November, 1951, and on 30th November, 195 1, the first respondent was declared elected, he having secured the largest number of votes. The result was published in the Official Gazette on 20th December, 1951. On 14th February, 1952, one of the unsuccessful candidates, Gyan Singh,  fifth respondent herein  filed Election Petition No. 14 of 1952 challenging the validity of the election of the first respondent. On 4th August, 1952, he applied to withdraw from the petition, and that was permitted by an order of the Tribunal dated 20th September, 1952. The appellant, who is one of the electors in the Rohru Constituency, then applied to be brought on record as the petitioner, and that was ordered on 21st November, 1952. The petition was then heard on the merits. Though a number of charges were pressed -at the trial, only two of them are material for the purpose of the present appeal  1  that Sri Padam Dev was interested in companytracts for the supply of Ayurvedic medicines to the Government, and was therefore disqualified for being chosen to the Assembly under section 7 d  of Act No. XLIII of 1951 and  2  that he had procured the assistance of Government servants for the furtherance of his election prospects, and had thereby companytravened section 123 8  of that Act. The facts giving rise to this companytention were that one Daulataram had subscribed in the numberination paper of Sri Padam Dev as proposer and one Motiram as seconder, both of them being Government servants employed in the post office, and,that one Sital Singh, an extra-departmental agent, was appointed by Sri Padam Dev as one of his polling agents at a booth at Arhal. By its judgment dated 25th September, 1953, the Election Tribunal held firstly that section 7 d  of Act No. XLIII of 1951 had number been made applicable to elections in Part C States, and that further there was numberproof that on 12th October, 1951, the date of numberination, there were companytracts subsisting between Sri Padam Dev and the Government. With reference to the charge under section 123 8 , the Tribunal held by a majority that the section did number prohibit Government servants from merely proposing or seconding numberination papers, and that it had number been proved that Daulataram and Motiram did anything beyond that. As regards Sital Singh, while two of the members took the view that section 123 8  did number prohibit the appointment of a Government servant as polling agent, the third member was of a different opinion. But all of them companycurred in holding that this point was number open to the petitioner, as it had number been specifically raised in the petition. In the result, the petition was dismissed. It is against this judgment that the present appeal has been brought by special leave, The first question that arises for determination is whether Sri Padam Dev was disqualified for being chosen to the Legislative Assembly by reason of his having held at the material dates companytracts for the supply of Ayurvedic medicines to the Himachal Pradesh State Government. The answer to it must depend on the interpretation of the relevant provisions of Act No. XLIX of 1951, which governs elections to the Legislative Assemblies in Part C States. Section 17 which deals with disqualifications runs as follows A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative Assembly of a State, if he is for the time being disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament under any of the provisions of article 102. Article 102 of the Constitution which becomes incorporated in the section by reference is as follows 102.  1  A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament--  a if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, other than an office declared by Parliament by law number to disqualify its holder  b if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a companypetent companyrt  c  if he is an undischarged insolvent  d  if he is number a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State -  e  if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. We are companycerned in this appeal only with article 102 1  e . The companytention of the appellant is that Act No. XLIII of 1951 being a law made by Parliament, the disqualifications laid down under section 7 therein would fall within article 102 1  e  and would under section 17 of Act No. XLIX Of 1951 be attracted to elections held under that Act, The respondent attempted several answers to this companytention. He firstly companytended that as Act No. XLIII of 1951 did number proprio vigore apply to elections in Part C States, he was number a person disqualified by or under the terms of that law as required by article 102 1  e , and that therefore he was number hit by section 17. Though this companytention might, at first thought, sound plausible, a closer examination of the language of section 17 shows that this is number its true import. The section does number enact that persons who are disqualified under a law made by Parliament shall be disqualified to be chosen under the Act. What it does enact is that if a person would be disqualified to be chosen to either House under an Act of Parliament, he would be dis- qualified to be chosen for the State Assembly. In other words, what would be a disqualification for a candidate being chosen to either House would be a disqualification to be chosen to the State Legislature. In this view, it is of numberconsequence that the candidate was number disqualified under section 7 d  by its own force. It was next companytended that whatever interpretation section 17 might be susceptible of if it had. stood alone, read in companyjunction with section 8 of Act No. XLIX of 1951 it must be companystrued as excluding section 7 d  of Act No. XLIII of 1951. Section 8 of Act No. XLIX of 1951 enacts that Parts I and III to XI of Act No. XLIII of 1951 and the rules made thereunder apply to all elections under the Act, subject to such modifications as the President might direct. Section 7 occurs in Part II of Act No. XLIII of 1951, and that is number one of the parts extended under section 8. The argument is that section 7 having been omitted by design from the sections made applicable, the Legislature must be taken to have intended that it should number apply to elections held under the Act, and that section 17 should accordingly be so companystrued as number to defeat that intention. Reliance was placed on the well-known rules of companystruction that the provisions of a statute should be read in such manner as to give effect to all of them, and so as to avoid inconsistency and repugnancy.