Mehr Chand Mahajan, C.J. This appeal raises a question of importance whether a widow can exercise a power of adoption companyferred on her or possessed by her at any time during her life irrespective of any devolution of property or changes in the family or other circumstances and even after a grandson has companye on the scene but has subsequently died without leaving a widow or a son. The situation in which this question arises can properly be appreciated by reference to the following genealogy Dyamappa ----------------------------------------- Kalasappa Girimaji Krishtarao Hanamanta Radhabai Gangabai --------------  Deft. 2   Deft. 1   Senior widow   Junior widow  Malhar Ganesh Gurunath  Resp. 3   Resp. 5  ------------------  Appellant adopted Kamalabai Yamunabai by Gangabai on Venkatesh Hanamant  Resp. 1   Resp. 2  18-11-53   Resp. 4   Resp. 6  Dattatraya  son   died 1913  Sundarabai  died after her husband in 1913  ------------------- Kalasappa Jagannath  predeceased  died 1914  Dattatraya Gurunath, the plaintiff, claims that he was adopted in 1943 by Gangabai, widow of Krishtarao. Krishtarao died in 1890, leaving him surviving two widows Radhabai and Gangabai and a son Dattatraya. Dattatraya died in 1913 leaving him surviving a widow Sundarabai and a son Jagannath. Sundarabai died shortly after Dattatraya while Jagannath died in the year 1914. After an interval of about 30 years since his death, it is alleged that Gangabai who survived both her son, and grandson adopted the plaintiff, and thus raised the problem which we are called upon to solve. On the 15th of March, 1944 the appellant instituted the suit out of which this appeal arises in forma pauperis on the allegation that he was the adopted son of Krishtarao and adopted to him by Gangabai, his junior widow, and as such was entitled to the possession of his adoptive fathers properties companyprised in the suit. He also claimed a declaration regarding the amount of companypensation money payable to the plaintiffs family for the land acquired by Hubli Municipality. The defendants who are the sons and grandsons of the first companysin of Krishtarao disputed the plaintiffs adoption on the ground that Gangabais power to adopt was extinguished when Dattatraya died in 1913, leaving behind him a widow Sundarabai and a son Jagannath who companyld companytinue the family line. Gangabai in her written statement supported the plaintiffs claim and asserted that the senior widow Radhabai had given companysent to her adopting the plaintiff. The trial judge upheld the defendants companytention and dismissed the plaintiffs suit. The factum of the plaintiffs adoption was however upheld, and it was further held that Radhabai did number give her companysent to the adoption. On appeal this decision was affirmed by the High Court and it was held that Gangabais power to adopt came to an end at the time when her son died leaving a son and a widow to companytinue the family line. No finding was given on the question whether Radhabai had given her companysent to the adoption. That perhaps would have been the simplest way to end the dispute. Against the decision of the High Court this appeal in forma pauperis is number before us by special leave. The only question canvassed in the appeal is in respect to the validity of the plaintiffs adoption. It was companytended that Hindu Shastric Law itself sets numberlimit to the exercise of the widows power of adoption once she has acquired that power or is possessed of it, and that being so, the power can be exercised by her during her life-time when necessity arises for the exercise of it for the purpose of companytinuing the line of her husband.