CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 113 of 1953. Appeal from the Judgment and Decree, dated the 25th day of March, 1952, of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay  Bavdekar and Dixit JJ.  in Appeal No. 554 of 1951, from Original Decree arising out of the Judgment and Decree, dated the 30th day of June, 1951, of the Court of the Joint Civil Judge, Senior Division of Thana, in Special Suit No. 12 of 1949. S. Krishnaswamy lyengar,  J. B. Dadachanji, V.B. Rege and Ganpat Rai, with him  for the appellants. B. Jathar, R. B. Kotwal and Naunit Lal for respondent No. 1. 1954. April 12. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by GHULAM HASAN J.-This appeal is brought by leave of the High Court of Bombay against the judgment and decree of a Division Bench of that Court  Bavdekar and Dixit JJ.  dated March 25, 1952, modifying the judgment and decree of the Civil Judge, Senior Division of Thana, dated June 30, 1951. The appeal arises out of a partition between 6 brothers of a joint Hindu family. The joint family carried on joint family business of a grocery shop, liquor shops, a ration shop, a motor-bus service and also moneylending under the name of Sontakke Brothers. The family also Possessed immovable and movable property. Balkrishna Sitaram Sontakke is the eldest of the brothers and is the plaintiff respondent in the present appeal. He will be referred to hereafter as the plain-tiff. It is companymon ground that up to 1944 the brothers were living and messing together and the income from the family business used to be kept with the plaintiff. From April 14, 1945, the situation changed and the parties began to appropriate the proceeds of the various businesses carried on by them separately to themselves. The plaintiff was running the liquor shops, defendants Nos. I and 2 who are the appellants, were carrying on the motor-bus service business while defendant No. 4 was running the grocery shop. The parties tried to have partition effected between them through arbitrators but the attempt failed. On June 29, 1945, all the five brothers filed a suit for partition against the plaintiff of all joint family properties including the accounts of all the businesses. The suit was numbered 39 of 1945. It was companypromised on March 7, 1946. By this companypromise it was declared that prior to 1942 all the accounts of the various businesses had been companyrectly maintained and shown, that the parties had agreed to have arbitrators appointed through Court for examining the accounts from 1942 up to March 31, 1946, and for determining the amount due up to that date. Each of the brothers was to get one -sixth share in the cash balance as found on March 31, 1946, upon examination of accounts by the arbitrators. All the movable property of the joint family including the stock-in-trade of all the family businesses was to be divided equally among all the brothers. The companypromise further declared that the plaintiff was to have one-sixth share in the motor garage and that defendants 1 and 2 were to pay the price of one-sixth share to him. These are the material provisions of the companypromise. One of the brothers was a minor and the Court finding the companypromise to be for the benefit of the minor accepted it and passed a pre- liminary decree in terms of the companypromise on July 25, 1947. If numberhing else had happened to disturb the natural companyrse of events, the proceedings would have ended in a final decree for partition. The plaintiff, however, companymenced a fresh suit on February 23, 1949, companyfining his relief to his share of the profits and assets Of the motor business carried on by defendants Nos. 1 and 2 after March 31,1946. His case was that the companypromise was made in a hurry, that the parties omitted to provide in the companypromise about the future companyduct of the motor business from April 1, 1946, that the motor business was still a joint family business and that he had a right to ask for accounts of that business subsequent to March 31, 1946. In defence it was pleaded that the companypromise was made after due deliberation, that accounts of the motor business and grocery shop should actually have been taken up to April 14, 1945, the date of disruption of the joint family status, but the parties agreed by way of companypromise that account of all family businesses should be taken up to March 31, 1946. It was also pleaded that the claim was barred by res judicata. Upon the issues framed in the case the Civil Judge found that the suit was number. barred by reason of the decision in the previous suit No. 39 of 1945, that the decision in that suit was number obtained by fraud and misrepresentation and that the companypromise in the previous suit was number due to a mistake or misunderstanding. Despite these findings the Civil Judge held that although the motor business carried on after the partition had ceased to be a joint family business yet as it was carried on by some members of a family their position was analogous to that of a partner carrying on partnership after dissolution and applying the principle underlying section 37 of the Partnership Act he held that the two brothers carrying on the motor business were liable to account. Accordingly he passed a preliminary decree directing the accounts of the motor business to be taken from March 31, 1946, up to the date on which a final decree for payment of the amount found to be due would be made. A Commissioner was appointed to take the accounts to ascertain the profits earned by the use of the capital belonging to the shares of brothers other than those who carried on the motor business. In appeal Bavdekar J. with whom Dixit J. agreed modified the decree of the trial Court by directing that the accounts were to be taken up to the date when the businesses discontinued and number up to the date of the final decree. The learned Judges held that the cause of action for the present suit was different from the cause. of action in the previous suit and that the suit was number barred by res judicata or by Order II, rule 2, of the Code of Civil Procedure. After delivering themselves of some companyflicting observations to which reference will in detail be made hereafter they held that the companysent decree did number expressly negative the right for accounts of the motor transport business. Finally the learned Judges recorded the companyclusion that regardless of the pleadings in the case the defendants Nos. I and 2 had made use of the joint family property and that they stood in, the position of companyowners and as companytemplated in section 90 of the Indian Trusts Act were liable to render accounts for the-profits which were attributable to the employment of the assets owned by the parties jointly. Learned companynsel for the appellants has companytested the view of the High Court upon all the points decided, ,against them. He has companytended that the cause of action in a suit for partition is the desire and intention of the family to separate, that the cause of action in the two suits is identically the same and number separate and distinct and.