Kapur, J. This is an appeal by Special leave under Art. 136 of the Constitution of India against the Judgment of the Allahabad High Court companyfirming the companyviction of the Appellant Raghubansh Lal under s. 218 of the Indian Penal Code. The offence for which the appellant was tried was, that being a Patwari of village Arazi Mafi Pandai and thus a public servant, he framed the khasra of 1358 F in respect of plots Nos. 170 and 74/1 of village Arazi Mafi Pandai, which he knew to be incorrect with intent to cause or knowing to be likely that he would thereby cause an undue loss to Smt. Mahura Kunwar. The facts out of which this appeal has arisen are these. Two brothers, Mahadeo and Sahdeo, who were members of a joint Hindu family owned certain plots of land. Mahadeo died leaving a widow Basera Kunwar, a son Damodar Pande and a daughter Mahura Kuer. Sahdeo died leaving a widow Sundra Kuer. On the death of Damodar Pande, one Ram Sewak Pande brought a suit against Smt. Basera Kunwar and Smt. Sundra Kuer for possession of zamindari property including sir and sayar left by Damodar Pande which was dismissed. On the death of Basera Kunwar, Adit Pande son of Ram Sewak and one Ganga Pande got their names mutated in regard to this property. Smt. Mahura Kuar then brought a suit for possession of the estate left by Smt. Basera Kunwar against Adit Pande and Ganga Pande which was decreed on August 1, 1941. On May 31, 1943, Smt. Mahura Kuar obtained possession through Court of this estate which included the two plots Nos. 170 and 74/1. On February 25, 1950, Mahura Kuer made an application to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate for taking proceedings under s. 145 of the Criminal Procedure Code against Adit Pande and Ganga Pande. The Magistrate ordered the attachment of the land including the two plots Nos. 170 and 74/1, and it is alleged that possession of these two plots was given to Shubh Karan as sapurdar or custodian. The property remained under attachment from March 15, 1950, to December 18, 1950, which would companyprise a part of 1357 F and a part of 1358 F. On December 18, 1950, the proceedings taken by the Magistrate ended in favour of Mahura Kuar with the finding that her possession had been established. Adit Pande and Ganga Pande were restrained from interfering with the possession of the lady and it was ordered that the attachment should end and the possession of the plots of land in dispute be handed back to Smt. Mahura Kuer. The opposite party took a revision to the District Magistrate which was dismissed on March 28, 1951, and it is alleged that actual possession was delivered in April, 1951. From December 1950 to April 1951, the delivery of possession remained stayed under the District Magistrates order. On July 31, 1951, Smt. Mahura Kuar filed the present companyplaint in the Court of the Judicial Magistrate at Ghazipur under s. 218 of the Indian Penal Code against the present appellant in which after reciting the various relevant facts she alleged that the accused who was a Patwari of the village had deliberately made wrong entries in regard to the plots Nos. 170 and 74/1 and in the remarks companyumn had entered the name of Adit Pande as being in possession, and thus he had companymitted an offence under s. 218 of the Indian Penal Code. The cases was companymitted to the companyrt of Session where in support of the prosecution Smt. Mahura Kuer herself appeared as witness No. 1 and her case was supported by two other witnesses, namely, Gouri Shankar P.W. 2 and Naresh P.W. 3. The accused produced in defence Adit Pande, D.W. 1 and Ram Swarup D.W. 2. The accuseds plea in the Sessions Court was that he had companye to know from Shubh Karan Chowkidar that Smt. Mahura Kuar had won the case under s.