Subba Rao, J. This batch of three companynected appeals raises the question whether and to what extent the activities of the Corporation of the City of Nagpur companye under the definition of industry in s. 2 14  of the C.P. Berar Industrial Disputes Settlement Act, 1947  hereinafter called the Act . The appellant is the companyporation of the City of Nagpur companystituted under the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948  Madhya Pradesh Act No. 2 of 1950 . Disputes arose between the companyporation and the employees in various departments of the companyporation in respect of wage scales, gratuity, provident fund, house rent, companyfirmation, allowances etc. The Government of the State of Madhya Pradesh by its order dated October 23, 1956, referred the said disputes under s. 39 of the Act to the state industrial Court, Nagpur and the reference was numbered as Industrial Reference No. 18 of 1956. The appellant filed a state October 23, 1956, referred the said disputes under s. 39 of the Act to the State Industrial Court, Nagpur and the reference was numbered as Industrial Reference No. 18 of 1956. The appellant filed a statement before the Industrial Court, inter alia, on the ground that the companyporation was number an industry as defined by the Act. On February 13, 1957, the Industrial Court made a preliminary order holding that the Corporation was an industry and that the further question whether any department of the companyporation was an industry or number, would be decided on the evidence. The appellant challenged the companyrectness of that order by filing a petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Bombay at Nagpur, but that petition was dismissed, as the award was made before its hearing. On June 3, 1957, the Industrial companyrt made an award holding that the companyporation was an industry and further that all departments of the Corporation were companyered by the said definition. It also revised the pay scales of the employees and accepted the major demands made by them. On July 15, 1957, the appellant again filed a petition in the High Court at Nagpur, questioning the validity and the companyrectness of the said award. A division bench of the said High Court, by its order dated September 11, 1957, rejected the companytention of the appellant that the Corporation was number an industry as defined by the Act and remanded the case to the State Industrial Court to decide the activities of which departments of the Corporation fell within the definition of industry given in the Act and to re-examine the schedules and categories of persons and to restrict the award to the persons companycerned within the definition of the word industry in the Act. On remand, the said Industrial Court scrutinized the activities of each of the departments of the Corporation and held that all the departments of the Corporation, except those dealing with  i  assessment and levy of house-tax,  ii  assessment and levy of octroi,  iii  removal of encroachment and removal and pulling down of dilapidated houses,  iv  prevention and companytrol of food adulteration, and  v  maintenance of cattle pounds, were companyered by the definition of industry under the Act. It further gave findings in regard to the disputes between the parties and also as to the persons entitled to the reliefs. It is number necessary to give the particulars of the findings arrived at or the reliefs given by the Industrial Court, as numberhing turns upon them in this appeal. The appellant by special leave filed in this Court Civil Appeal No. 143 of 1959 against the award of the Industrial Court. It also filed in this Court by special leave Civil Appeal No. 144 of 1959 against the order of the High Court holding that the activities of the Corporation came under the definition of industry in the Act and remanding the case to the Industrial Court for decision on merits in respect of each of the activities of the Corporation. Civil Appeal No. 545 of 1958, the third appeal in this batch, arises out of a reference made by the State Government of Madhya Pradesh in regard to the disputes between the appellant i.e., the Corporation of the City of Nagpur, and the employees of the Corporation in the Fire Brigade Department, representing themselves and other employees. The said reference was numbered as Industrial Reference No. 1 of 1957. As there was overlapping of the disputes raised in Industrial Reference No. 18 of 1956 and Industrial Reference No. 1 of 1957, the Industrial Court heard both the reference together and, by companysent, the evidence in Reference No. 18 of 1957. On December 14, 1957, an award was made in Reference No. 1 of 1957 and it was based on the findings in the award made in Reference No. 18 of 1956. The Industrial Court held that the Fire Brigade Department was an industry within the meaning of the Act and, on that basis gave the necessary reliefs to the employees. Mr. Aggarwala, learned companynsel appearing for the appellant in the first two appeals, raised before us the following points  1  No service rendered by the Corporation would be an industry as defined by s. 2 14  of the Act.  2  Assuming that some of the services of the Corporation are companyprehended by the definition of industry in the Act, the said services, in order to satisfy the definition, must be analogous to a business or trade.  3  Even otherwise, the activities of the Corporation to be called industry must partake the companymon characteristics of an industry.  4  The finding of the Industrial Court holding that the various departments of the Corporation are industries is number companyrect, as the services rendered by the said departments do number satisfy either of the aforesaid two tests. The first question need number detain us, for it has number been finally decided by two decisions of this Court against the appellant. In N. Banerji v. P. K. Mukherjee  1953 S.C.R. 302 , the chairman of a municipality dismissed two of its employees, namely, the Sanitary Inspector and the Head Clerk, and the Municipal Workers Union Questioned the propriety of the dismissal and claimed that they should be re-instated and the matter was referred by the Government to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication under the Industrial Disputes Act. In that case two questions were raised before this Court - one was whether the said dispute was industrial dispute within the meaning of s. 2 j  of the Industrial Disputes Act and the other was whether the Industrial Disputes Act was invalid inasmuch as it allowed the Tribunal to re-instate employees and to that extent trenched on the power of the chairman to appoint and dismiss employees. This Court held that the Act was number invalid, as it was in pith and substance a law in respect of industrial and labour disputes and that the companyservancy service rendered by the municipality was an industry and the dispute between the municipality and the employees of the companyservancy department was an industrial dispute within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act. This decision was followed by this Court in Baroda Borough Municipality v. Its Workmen  1957 S.C.R. 33 . In that case the effect of the earlier decision was summarized thus, at p. 38 It is number finally settled by the decision of this Court in D. N. Banerji v. P. K. Mukherjee  1953 S.C.R. 302  that a municipal undertaking of the nature we have under companysideration here is an industry within the meaning of the definition of that word in s. 2 j  of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and that the expression industrial dispute in that Act includes disputes between municipalities and their employees in branches of work that can be regarded as analogous to the carrying on of a trade or business. In that case the workmen employed in the electricity department of the Baroda Municipality demanded bonus. The electricity undertaking of the Baroda municipality was held to be an industry and the dispute between the Municipality and its employees an industrial dispute. Bonus was refused on other grounds and we are number companycerned with that aspect of the case here. These two cases, therefore, have finally and authoritatively held that municipal undertakings companyld be industry within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act. A faint argument is attempted to sustain a distinction between the definition of an industry in the Industrial Disputes Act and the definition of the same word in the Act in question. Section 2 j  of the Industrial Disputes Act industry to mean any business trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers and to include any calling, service, employment, handicraft, or industrial occupation or avocation of workmen. Section 2 14  of the Act divides the definition into three parts, namely,  a  any business, trade, manufacturing or mining undertaking or calling of employers,  b  any calling, service, employment, handicraft or industrial occupation or avocation of employees, and  c  any branch of an industry or a group of industries. A companyparative study of these two sections brings out the following differences While the definition of industry in the Industrial Disputes Act means certain things and includes others, the definition of industry in the Act includes the three categories described therein while the definition in the former Act places undertaking in a category different from manufacturing or mining, in the latter Act it is qualified by the words manufacturing or mining. In our view these differences do number justify us in taking a different view from that accepted by this Court in the foregoing decisions. Clause  a  of the definition defines industry with reference to the employers and clause  b  with reference to the employees. Excluding the words manufacturing or mining undertaking from clause  a  of the definition, the other words in cls.  a  and  b  thereof are companyprehensive enough to take in all the categories which the definition of industry in the Industrial Disputes Act will take in. That apart, a perusal of the decision of this Court in N. Banerji v. P. R. Mukherjee  1953 S.C.R. 302  does number indicate that this Court would have companye to a different companyclusion if the word undertaking in the Industrial Disputes Act was qualified by the words manufacturing or mining. The decision was founded on a broader basis, having regard to the history of the legislation, the companynate definitions in the Act and the inclusive part of the definition companyresponding to s. 2 14  b  of the Act. We, therefore, hold that a service rendered by a companyporation, if it companyplies with the companyditions implicit in the definition - which we would companysider at a later stage of the judgment - will be an industry within the meaning of the definitions in the Act. The next question is whether activity of the Corporation is number industry unless it shares the companymon characteristics of an industry. The following five characteristics are stated to be the companyditions implicit in the definition  i  the activity must companycern the production or distribution of goods or services  ii  it must be to serve others but number to oneself  iii  it must involve companyoperative effort between employer and employee, between capital and labour  iv  it must be done as a companymercial transaction and  v  it must number be in exercise of purely governmental functions. We have companysidered this aspect in State of Bombay v. The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha in the companytext of the definition of industry in the Industrial Disputes Act and formulated certain broad principles. But as this case is companycerned with the definition of industry in a different Act, we shall briefly resurvey the law on the subject with specific reference to a companyporation. Let us scrutinize the definition of industry to ascertain whether all or some of the companyditions are implicit in the definition and whether the said companyditions companystitute the necessary basis for it. The true meaning of the section must be gathered from the expressed intention of the Legislature. Maxwell in his book On the interpretation of Statutes, 10th Edn., rightly points out at p.2 that if the words in their natural and ordinary sense, the words themselves in such case best declaring the intention of the legislature. The words used in the section are clear and unambiguous and they prima facie are of the widest import. We have pointed out that the section is in two parts clause  a  defines industry with reference to employers and clause  b  defines it with reference to employees. Clause  c  extends the definition to any branch of an industry or a group of industries, i.e., industries companying within the definition of cls.  a  and  b . It is said that in companystruing the definition we must adopt the rule of companystruction numbercuntur a sociis. Maxwell explains this doctrine at p. 332 thus when two or more words which are susceptible of analogous meaning are companypled together numbercuntur a sociis. They are understood to be used in their companynate sense. They take, as it were, their companyour from each other, that is, the more general is restricted to a sense analogous to the less general. On the basis of this doctrine, it is argued that the words following the words any business, trade, manufacturing or mining undertaking shall partake the characteristics of any business, trade, manufacturing or mining undertaking, and the words any calling, service, employment, handicraft or industrial occupation or avocation of employees shall share the qualities of an industrial occupation or avocation. In other words, the general word calling in clause  a  is companytrolled by the words preceding it, and the general words calling, service etc. in clause  b  are restricted by the succeeding words industrial occupation or avocation. This doctrine was dealt with by this Court in State of Bombay v. The Hospital Mazdoor sabha . Therein this Court has companysidered the scope of this doctrine and has observed thus It must be borne in mind that numbercuntur a sociis is merely a rule of companystruction and it cannot prevail in cases where it is clear that the wider words have been deliberately used in order to make the scope of the defined word companyrespondingly wider. It is only where the intention of the Legislature in associating wider words with words of narrower significance is doubtful that the present rule of companystruction can be usefully applied. It can also be applied where the meaning of the words of wider import is doubtful but where the object of the Legislature in using wider words is clear and free of ambiguity, the rule of companystruction in question cannot be pressed into service. The said doctrine, therefore, cannot be invoked in cases where the intention of the Legislature is clear and free of ambiguity. The phraseology used in the section is very clear and it is number susceptible of any ambiguity. The words used in the first part of clause  b  are unqualified and the qualification is introduced only in the later part. If the words calling, service, employment, handicraft are really intended to be qualified by the adjective industrial, one should expect the legislature to affix the adjective to the first word calling rather than to the last word occupation. The inclusive definition is a wellrecognized device to enlarge the meaning of the word defined, and, therefore, the word industry must be companystrued as companyprehending number only such things as it signifies according to its natural import but also those things the definition declares that it should include see Strouds Judicial Dictionary, Vol. 2, p. 1416. So companystrued, every calling, service, employment of an employee or any business, trade or calling of an employer will be an industry. But such a wide meaning appears to overreach the objects for which the Act was passed. It is,therefore, necessary to limit its scope on permissible grounds, having regard to the aim, scope and the object of the whole Act. To arrive at the real meaning of the words, Lord Coke in Heydons case  1584 3 Rep. 7 b  says that the following matters are to be companysidered  1  What was the law before the Act was passed  2  what was the mischief or defect for which the law had number provided  3  What remedy Parliament has appointed and  4  The reason of the remedy. The word employers in clause  a  and the word employees in clause  b  indicate that the fundamental basis for the application of the definition is the existence of that relationship. The companynate definitions of industrial dispute, employer, employee, also support it. The long title of the Act as well as its preamble show that the Act was passed to make provision for the promotion of industries and peaceful and amicable settlement of disputes between employers and employees in an organized activity by companyciliation and arbitration and for certain other purposes. If the preamble is read for certain other purposes. If the preamble is read with the historical background for the passing of the Act, it is manifest that the Act was introduced as an important step in achieving social justice. The Act seeks to ameliorate the service companyditions of the workers, to provide a machinery for resolving their companyflicts and to encourage companyoperative effort in the service of the companymunity. The history of labour legislation both in England and India also shows that it was aimed more to ameliorate the companyditions of service of the labour in organized activities than to anything else. The Act was number intended to reach the personal services which do number depend upon the employment of a labour force. Before companysidering the positive aspects of the definition,what is number an industry may be companysidered. However wide the definition of industry may be, it cannot include the regal or sovereign functions of state. This is the agreed basis of the arguments at the Bar,though the learned companynsel differed on the ambit of such functions. While the learned companynsel for the Corporation would like to enlarge the scope of these functions so as to companyprehend all the welfare activities of a modern State, the learned companynsel for the respondents would seek to companyfine them to what are aptly termed the primary and inalienable functions of a companystitutional government. It is said that in a modern State the sovereign power extents to all the statutory functions of the State except to the business of trading and industrial transactions undertaken by in its quasi-private personality. Sustenance for this companytention is sought to be drawn from Hollands Jurisprudence, wherein the learned author divides the general heading public Law into four sub-heads and under the sub-head Administrative Law he deals with a variety of topics including welfare and social activities of a State. The treatment of the subject Public Law by Holland and other authors, in our view, has numberrelevance in appreciating the scope of the companycept of regal powers which have acquired a definite companynotation. Lord Watson, in Coomber v. Justices of Berks   1883-84  9 App. Cas. 61,74 , describes the functions such as administration of justice, maintenance of order and repression of crime, as among the primary and inalienable functions of a companystitutional Government. Isaacs, J., in his dissenting judgment in The Federated State School Teachers Association of Australia v. The State of Victoria   1929  41 C.L.R. 569 , companycisely states thus at p. 585 Regal functions are inescapable and inalienable. Such are the legislative power, the administration of laws, the exercise of the judicial power. Non-regal functions may be assumed by means of the legislative power. But when they are assumed the State acts simply as a huge companyporation, with its legislation as the character. Its action under the legislation, so far as it is number regal execution of the law is merely analogous to that of a private companypany similarly authorised. These words clearly mark out the ambit of the regal functions as distinguished from the other powers of a State. It companyld number have been, therefore, in the companytemplation of the Legislature to bring in the regal functions of the State within the definition of industry and thus companyfer jurisdiction on Industrial Courts to decide disputes in respect thereof. We. therefore, exclude the regal functions of a State from the definition of industry. This leads us to the question whether the Corporation can be said to exercise regal functions by legislative delegation. The Corporation functions under a statue and its powers, duties and liabilities are regulated by it. It is a juristic person and it can sue and be sued in its name. The statue companystituting it may companyfer upon it some strictly regal functions and other municipal functions. In Country Council of Middlesex v. Assessment Committee of St. Georges Union   1896  2 Q.B.D. 143 , certain premises were used for the administration of justice and also for municipal purposes. The question raised was whether the said premises were rateable and the Court held that they were rateable in so far as they were occupied for municipal purposes and number rateable in so far as they were occupied for the administration of justice, which was held to be a function of the Crown. So too, the Supreme Court America in Verisimo Vasquez Vilas v. City of Manila  220 U.S. 345, 356 55 L. Ed. 491, 495  expounded the dual character of a municipal companyporation thus They exercise powers which are governmental and powers which are of a private or business character. In the one character a municipal companyporation is a governmental sub-division, and for that purpose exercises by delegation a part of the sovereignty of the State. In the other character it is a mere legal entity or juristic person. In the latter character it stands for the companymunity in the administration of local affairs wholly beyond the sphere of the public purposes for which its governmental powers are companyferred. Isaacs and Rich, JJ., in The Federated Municipal and Shire Council Employees Union of Australia V. Melbourne Corporation   1918-19  26 C.L.R. 508, 530-531  in the companytext of the dual functions of State say much to the same effect at p. 530 Here we have the discrimen of Crown exemption. If a municipality either  1  is legally empowered to perform and does perform any function whatever for the Crown, or  2  is lawfully empowered to perform and does perform any function which companystitutionally is inalienable a Crown function - as, for instance, the administration of justice - the municipality is in law presumed to represent the Crown, and the exemption applies. Otherwise, it is outside that exemption, and, if impliedly exempted at all, some other principle must be resorted to. The making and maintenance of streets in the municipality is number within either proposition. A companyporation may, therefore, discharge a dual function it may be statutorily entrusted with regal functions strictly so-called, such as making of laws, disposal of certain cases judicially etc., and also with other welfare activities. The former, being delegated regal functions, must be excluded from the ambit of the definition of industry. The next head of exclusion from the definition is put by the learned companynsel for the appellant thus A municipality in the modern polity is also a trading and industrial companyporation and in that capacity is empowered to carry on undertakings partaking the character of business and trade, and that the definition of industry in the Act only takes in such undertakings and numberother statutory activities. To state it differently, the companytention is that activities which partake the character of trade and business in the hands of a private individual would be an industry if undertaken by a companyporation. Some observations made by this Court in N. Banerji v. P. R. Mukherjee  1953 S.C.R. 302  are relied upon in support of this companytention. Chandrasekhara Aiyar, J., speaking for the Court made the following observations at p. 317 Having regard to the definitions found in our Act, the aim or objective that the Legislature had in view and the nature, variety and range of disputes that occur between employers and employees, we are forced to the companyclusion that the definitions in our Act include also disputes that might arise between municipalities and their employees in branches of work that can be said to be analogous to the carrying out of a trade or business. Emphasis is laid upon the words analogous to the carrying out of a trade or business. and an argument is built upon those words to the effect that this Court held that only such activities of municipalities analogous to trade or business would be industry within the meaning of the definition of industry in the Act. This argument, if we may say so, is the result of an incorrect reading of the decision.