CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 215 of 1955. Appeal from the judgment and decree dated April 1, 1953, of the Calcutta High Court in Appeal from Original Decree No. 89 of 1946, arising, out of the judgment and decree dated December 4, 1945, of the Subordinate Judge, Darjeeling, in Money Suit No. 5 of 1940. K. Jha and D. N. Mukherjee, for the appellant. B. Aggarwala, K. B. Bagchi and Sukumar Ghosh, for Respondents Nos. 1 to 5. 1959. March 26. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by SUBBA RAO, J.-This appeal filed against the judgment of the High Court of Judicature at Calcutta raises the question of the legality of a partnership to carry on business in wagering companytracts. The facts lie in a small companypass. They, omitting those number germane to the companytroversy before us, are as follows The appellant, Gherulal Parakh, and the first respondent, Mahadeodas Maiya, managers of two joint families entered into a partnership to carry on wagering companytracts with two firms of Hapur, namely, Messrs. Mulchand Gulzarimull and Baldeosahay Surajmull. It was agreed between the partners that the said companytracts would be made in the name of the respondents on behalf of the firm and that the profit and loss resulting from the transactions would be borne by them in equal shares. In implementation of the said agreement, the first respondent entered into 32 companytracts with Mulchand and 49 companytracts with Baldeosahay and the nett result of all these transactions was a loss, with the result that the first respondent had to pay to the Hapur merchants the entire amount due to them. As the appellant denied his liability to bear his share of the loss, the first respondent along With his sons filed O. S. No. 18 of 1937 in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Darjeeling, for the recovery of half of the loss incurred in the transactions with Mulchand. In the plaint he reserved his right to claim any further amount in respect of transactions with Mulchand that might be found due to him after the accounts were finally settled with him. That suit was referred to arbitration and on the basis of the award, the Subordinate Judge made a decree in favour of the first respondent and his sons for a sum of Rs. 3,375. After the final accounts were settled between the first respondent and the two merchants of Hapur and after the amounts due to them were paid, the first respondent instituted a suit, out of which the present appeal arises, in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Darjeeling, for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 5,300 with interest thereon. Subsequently the plaint was amended and by the amended plaint the respondents asked for the same relief on the basis that the firm had been dissolved. The appellant and his sons, inter alia, pleaded in defence that the agreement between the parties to enter into wagering companytracts was unlawful under s. 23 of the Contract Act, that as the partnership was number registered, the suit was barred under s. 69 1  of the Partnership Act and that in any event the suit was barred under S. 2, Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The learned Subordinate Judge found that the agreement between the parties was to enter into wagering companytracts depending upon the rise and fall of the market and that the said agreement was void as the said object was forbidden by law and opposed to public policy. He also found that the claim in respect of the transactions with Mulchand so far as it was number included in the earlier suit was number barred under s. 2, Rule 2, Code of Civil Procedure, as the cause of action in respect of that part of the claim did number arise at the time the said suit was filed. He further found that the partnership was between the two joint families of the appellant and the first respondent respectively, that there companyld number be in law such a partnership and that therefore s. 69 of the Partnership Act was number applicable. In the result, he dismissed the suit with companyts. On appeal, the learned Judges of the High Court held that the partnership was number between the two joint families but was only between the two managers of the said families and therefore it was valid. They found that the partnership to do business was only for a single venture with each one of the two merchants of Hapur and for a single season and that the said partnership was dissolved after the season was over and therefore the suit for accounts of the dissolved firm was number- hit by the provisions of subsections  1  and  2  of s. 69 of the Partnership Act. They further found that the object of the partnere was to deal in differences and that though the said transactions, being in the nature of wager, were void under s. 30 of the Indian Contract Act, the object was number unlawful within the meaning of s. 23 of the said Act. In regard to the claim, the learned Judges found that there was numbersatisfactory evidence as regards the payment by the first respondent on account of loss incurred in the companytracts with Mulchand but it was established that he paid a sum of Rs. 7,615 on account of loss in the companytracts entered into with Baldeosahay. In the result, the High Court gave a decree to the first respondent for a sum of Rs. 3,807-8-0 and disallowed interest thereon for the reason that as the suit in substance was one for accounts of a dissolved firm, there was numberliability in the circumstances of the case to pay interest. In the result, the High Court gave a decree in favour of the first respondent for the said amount together with another small item and dismissed the suit as regards the plaintiffs other than the first respondent and the defendants other than the appellant . Before we companysider the questions of law raised in the case, it would -be companyvenient at the outset to dispose of questions of fact raised by either party.