CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Criminal Appeal No. 64 of 1958. Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated December 3, 1956, of the Allahabad High Court in Criminal Reference No. 159 of 1956. C. Sen, for the appellant. K. Daphtary, Solicitor-General of India,. Purshottam Tricumdas, G. C. Mathur and C. P. Lal, for the respondent. 1960. April 1. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by SUBBA RAO, J.--This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad rejecting the reference made by the learned Sessions Judge under S. 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The appellant is a minor and lives under the guardianship of his mother, Smt. Gita Basu. On September 14, 1955, the appellant, through his mother, filed an application under s. 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure  hereinafter referred to as the Code  in the Court of the City Magistrate, Allahabad, praying for an order against the respondent, Advocate-General, Uttar Pradesh, Allahabad, for maintenance alleging that he is his putative father. Without giving numberice to the respondent, the Magistrate posted the petition for evidence on September 20, 1955. On that date, the appellants guardian was examined and she was also cross- examined by the Magistrate at some length. After she was examined, the Magistrate directed her to produce any further evidence she might like to lead under s. 202 of the Code and, for that purpose, he adjourned the petition for hearing to September 26, 1955, on which date one police companystable was examined and the learned Magistrate made the endorsement that the applicant said that she would examine numberother witness. On September 27, 1955, the appellant filed a petition before the Magistrate stating that s. 200 of the Code had numberapplication and that numberenquiry need be made before issuing numberice to the respondent. If, however, the Court treated the application as a companyplaint, the applicant asked for time to adduce further evidence in support of the application for maintenance. On that petition the learned Magistrate made the endorsement lead the further evidence, please, if you like . On October 6, 1955, the guardian of the appellant examined one more witness. On that date, the learned Magistrate made in the proceeding sheet the endorsement numberfurther evidence to be led at this stage On October 10, 1955, the learned Magistrate made an order dismissing the application. He agreed with the petitioners companytention that ss. 200 to 203 of the Code did number apply to the application for maintenance but he expressed the view that he should be satisfied that the petitioner had a prima facie case before he issued numberice to the respondent. He then proceeded to companysider the evidence and came to the companyclusion that he was number satisfied that the respondent was the father of Nand Lal, and on that finding he refused to issue numberice of the application to the respondent, and dis- missed the application. The appellant filed a revision against that order of the learned Magistrate to the Sessions Judge, Allahabad. The learned Sessions Judge, after companysidering the materials placed before the Magistrate, came to the companyclusion that it was a fit case in which the Magistrate ought to have issued summons to the respondent under sub-s.  6  of s. 488 of the Code. He submitted the record to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad recommending that the order passed by the Magistrate be set aside and that the Magistrate be ordered to proceed with the application in accordance with law. The reference came up for hearing before Chowdhry, J., who, on the analogy of other sections of the Code held that the Magistrate in holding a preliminary enquiry acted in companysonance with the general scheme of the Code and that, therefore, the order dismissing the application was number vitiated by any illegality or irregularity. He observed that it was companyceded by the appellant before the Magistrate that the Magistrate companyld hold a preliminary enquiry and that, therefore, it was number open to the appellant to question its propriety. He also found that every opportunity was given to the guardian of the appellant to lead such evidence as he desired to produce and that, therefore, the appellant was number prejudiced by the alleged irregularity. On the main- tainability of the reference, he held that the finding arrived at by the learned Magistrate was one of fact on the materials placed on the record and, as the Magistrate did number act perversely or in companytravention of some well- established principles of law or procedure, the learned Sessions Judge should number have made the reference. The learned Judge finally pointed out that the proceedings were only summary in nature and that they did number deprive the appellant of his right to seek remedy, if any, in a civil companyrt. In the result, the reference was rejected. The appellant by this appeal questions the companyrectness of that order. Learned companynsel for the appellant companytends that the learned Magistrate followed a procedure number companytemplated by the Code of Criminal Procedure and that in any event he companyducted the enquiry in a manner which, to say the least, was unjust to the appellant. The learned Solicitor General, appearing for the respondent, supported the procedure adopted by the Magistrate and also the finding arrived at by him. He further companytended that the appellant in the High Court as well as before the Magistrate companyceded that the Magistrate had power to make a preliminary enquiry and that, therefore, he should number be allowed to question the validity of the enquiry for the first time before this Court. Ordinarily, in a case like this we should have been disinclined to interfere with the order of the High Court in an appeal filed under Art. 136 of the Constitution. But, this appeal discloses exceptional circumstances which companypel us to depart from the ordinary practice. It is number companyrect to state that the appellant had companyceded throughout that a Magistrate can make a preliminary enquiry under s. 488 of the Code before issuing numberice to the respondent. , Indeed the judgment of the Magistrate discloses that on behalf of the appellant certain decisions were cited in support of the companytention that an application under s. 488 of the Code does number companye under the purview of ss. 200 to 203 of the Code. Section 200 of the Code provides for the examination of the companyplainant and the wit- nesses present in companyrt. Section 202 enables him to make a further enquiry before issuing numberice. Section 203 empowers him to dismiss a petition, if in his judgment numbersufficient ground for proceeding with the case has been made out. The companytention raised by the appellant, therefore, can only mean that the Magistrate -cannot make a preliminary enquiry in the manner companytemplated by the said provisions. Indeed, the Magistrate accepted this companytention but he observed But, as the learned companynsel submit, I have to be satisfied that a numberice under s. 488 Cr. P.C. should issue to the opposite party before issue it and that, therefore, all that has companye on record as yet is admissible for companysideration of the question whether the numberice should be issued or number . This observation did number record any companycession on the part of the appellant that the Magistrate companyld make a preliminary enquiry.