CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Criminal Appeal No. 76 of 1956. Appeal from the judgment and order dated August 27, 1954, of the Allahabad High Court in Criminal Misc. Writ No. 20 of 1954. L. Misra, Advocate-General for the State of Uttar Pradesh. G. 0. Mathur and C. P. Lal, for the appellants. S. Bindra, for the respondent.1960. January 21. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by SUBBA RAO J.-This appeal raises the question of interpretation of the words in the interest of public order in Art. 19 2  of the Constitution. The facts are number in dispute and they lie in a small companypass. The respondent, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia, is the General Secretary of the Socialist Party of India. The U. Government enhanced the irrigation rates for water supplied from canals to cultivators. The party to which the respondent belongs resolved to start an agitation against the said enhancement for the alleged reason that it placed an unbearable burden upon the cultivators. Pursuant to the policy of his party, the respondent visited Farrukhabad and addressed two public meetings wherein he made speeches instigating the audience number to pay enhanced irrigation rates to the Government. On July 4, 1954, at 10 p.m. he was arrested and produced before the City Magistrate, Farrukhabad, who remanded him for two days. After investigation, the Station officer, Kaimganj, filed a charge-sheet against the respondent before Sri P. R. Gupta, a Judicial Officer at Farrukliabad. On July 6, 1954, the Magistrate went to the jail to try the case against the respondent, but the latter took objection to the trial being held in the jail premises. When the Magistrate insisted upon proceeding with the trial, the respondent obtained an adjournment on the ground that he would like to move the High Court for transfer of the case from the file of the said Magistrate. Thereafter the respondent filed a petition before the High Court for a writ of habeas companypus on the ground, among others, that s. 3 of the U. P. Special Powers Act  Act No. XIV of 1932 , 1932,  hereinafter called the Act  was void under the Constitution. In the first instance the petition came up for disposal before a division bench of the High Court at Allahabad companysisting of Desai and Chaturvedi, Elaborate arguments were addressed before them companyering a wide field. The learned Judges delivered differing judgments expressing their views on the main points raised before them. They referred the matter to the Chief Justice for obtaining the opinion of a third Judge on the following two points  i  Was the provision of s. 3 of the U. P. Special Powers Act of 1932 making it penal for a person by spoken words to instigate class of persons number to pay dues recoverable as arrears of land revenue, inconsistent with Art. 19 1  a  of the Constitution on the 26th of January, 1950 ? and  ii  if so, was it in the interests of public order ? . The petition was placed before Agarwala, J., as a third Judge, who agreeing with Desai, J., gave the following answers to the questions referred to him Question No.  i . The provision of sections of the U. P. Special Powers Act, 1932, making it penal for a person by spoken words to instigate a class of persons number to pay dues recoverable as arrears of land revenue, was inconsistent with Article 19 1  a  of the Constitution on the 26th January, 1950. Question No.  ii . The restrictions imposed by section 3 of the U. P. Special Powers Act, 1932, were number in the interests of public order. In the usual companyrse the matter was placed before the two learned Judges who first heard the case and they, on the basis of the majority view, allowed the petition and directed the respondent to be released The State has preferred the present appeal against the said order of the High Court. The learned Advocate General, appearing for the appellant. stated before us that be did number propose to canvass the companyrectness of the majority view on one of the important points raised in the case, namely, that the effect of the passing of the Act did number ipso facto deprive a citizen of his freedom of speech guaranteed. under Art. 19 1   a  of the Constitution and its validity should be tested by the provisions of Art. 19 2  thereof. He did number. companycede the validity of the finding in this regard but assumed its companyrectness for the purpose of this case. Nothing further, therefore, need be mentioned on this point. The gist of the argument of the learned Advocate General may be stated thus The legislature can make laws placing reasonable restrictions on the rights of a citizen to freedom of speech and expression in the interests of public order among other grounds. The words in the interests of public order are wider in companynotation than the words for the maintenance of public order . Laws are rules made by the legislature for the governance of the people in the State which they are bound to obey, and they are enacted to keep public peace and order. The avowed object of s. 3 of the Act was to prevent persons from instigating others to break the laws imposing a liability upon a person or class of persons to pay taxes and other dues to the State, any authority or to any land-owner. The impugned section was enacted in the interests of public order and therefore the section was protected by Art. 19 2  of the Constitution. The learned Advocate General pointed out that the object of the State in preferring this appeal was to obtain the decision of this Court on the question of companystitutional validity of s. 3 of the Act and number to pursue the matter against Dr. Lohia. The respondent was number present at the time the appeal was heard and was number represented by an advocate. As the question raised was an important one, we requested Mr. N. S. Bindra to assist the Court, and he kindly agreed to do so. He supported the majority view of the High Court. We record our thanks for his assistance. At the outset it would number be out of place to numberice briefly the history of the Act. The Act was originally passed in the year 1932 during the British rule. In an attempt to offset the campaign of number-payment of taxes and other forms of agitation resorted to by the Congress Party, originally it was put on the statute book for one year but in 1940 when the State was under the Governors rule , the Act was made permanent. Under the Act, ss. 1 and 2 came into effect immediately on the passing of the Act and S. 1 2  enabled the Government by numberification to extend all or any of the remaining sections to any district or to any part of a district in the United Provinces. After the Constitution, the Act was number repealed but was allowed to companytinue, with necessary adaptations, in the statue book. Between April and June, 1954, the State Government extended the provisions of the Act to 33 districts including Farrukhabad district. Now lot us look at the provisions of the Act to ascertain its scope and field of operation. The preamble discloses that it was enacted in 1932 to make provision against and to take powers to deal with instigation to the illegal refusal of the payment of certain liablities and s. 2 defines liablity to mean land revenue or any sum recoverable as arrears of land revenue or any tax, rate, cess or other dues or amount payable to Government or to any local authority, or rent of agricultural land or anything recoverable as arrears of or along with such rent . Section 3 prescribes the punishment for instigation to the number-payment of a liability. As the argument centres round this section, it will be companyvenient to read the same Section 3 Whoever, by word, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations, or otherwise, instigates, expressly or by implication, any person or class of persons number to pay or to defer payment of any liability, and whoever does any act, with intent or knowing it to be likely that any words, signs or visible representations company. taining such instigation shall thereby be companymunicated directly or indirectly to any person or class of persons, in any manner whatsoever, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine, extending to Rs. 250, or with both. Section 4 says that any person to whom an arrear of liability is due may apply to the Collector to realize it and the Collector is authorized to realize the same as an arrear of land revenue. The impugned section may be dissected into the following companyponents  i  whoever by word, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise,  ii  instigates,  iii  expressly or by implication, iv  any person or class of persons,  v  number to pay any liability,  vi  to defer payment of any liability,  vii  does an act with intent that any words etc. shall be companymunicated to any person or class of persons,  viii  with the knowledge that it is likely that such words etc. shall be companymunicated to any person or class of persons,  ix  such companymunication may be made directly, or indirectly and  x  shall be punished with imprisonment or with fine or with both. Under this section a wide net has been cast to catch in a variety of acts of instigation ranging from friendly advice to a systematic propaganda number to pay or to defer payment of liability to Government, any authority or to any person to whom rent is payable in respect of agricultural land. The meaning of this section, read along with ss. 2 and 4, can be ascertained more clearly by illustration than by definition.  1  A instigates B number to pay any liability to Government, any authority or to any land owner  2  A instigates B to defer payment of any liability - to Government, any authority or landlord  3  A instigates a class of persons to do the same  4  A may do any one of the foregoing things number only by word, but also by signs, visible representations or otherwise  5  A may do any one of the things bona fide either to get the claim decided in a Court of law or to gain time to get the law changed  6  A may instigate B number to pay any amount due to Government or to any authority, but the said amount can be recovered by the authority companycerned as arrears of land revenue  7  A may tell C with intention or with knowledge that the said instigation may be companymunicated to B so that he may number pay  8  any statement by A to C may imply such instigation. In its wide amplitude the section takes in the innocent and the guilty persons, bona fide and mala fide advice, individuals and class, abstention from payment and deferment of payment, expressed or implied instigation, indirect or direct instigation, liability due number only to Government but to any authority or landholder. In short, numberperson, whether legal adviser or a friend or a well-wisher of a person instigated can escape the tentacles of this section, though in fact the rent due has been companylected through companyrcive process or otherwise. We shall number proceed to companysider the companystitutional validity of this section. The material portions of the relevant provisions of the Constitution may number be read Article 19  1  All citizens shall have the right-  a  to freedom of speech and expression Nothing in sub-clause  a  of clause  1  shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right companyferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decenc or morality or in relation to companytempt of companyrt,defamation or incitement to an offence. Clause  2  of Art. 19 was amended by the Constitution  First Amendment  Act, 1951. By this amendment several new grounds of restrictions upon the freedom of speech have been introduced, such as friendly relations with foreign States, public order and incitement to an offence. It is self evident and companymon place that freedom of speech is one of the bulwarks of a democratic form of Government. It is equally obvious that freedom of speech can only thrive in an orderly society. Clause  2  of Art. 19, therefore, does number affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right of freedom of speech in the interest of public order, among others. To sustain the existing law or a new law made by the State under cl.  2  of Art. 19, so far as it is relevant to the present enquiry, two companyditions should be companyplied with, viz.,  i  the restrictions imposed must be reasonable and  ii  they should be in the interests of public order. Before we companysider the scope of tile word,-, of limitation, reasonable restrictions and in the interests of , it is necessary to ascertain the true meaning of the expression public order in the said clause. The expression public order has a very wide companynotation. Order is the basic need in any organised society. It implies the orderly state of society or companymunity in which citizens can peacefully pursue their numbermal activities of life. In the words of an eminent Judge of the Supreme Court of America the essential rights are subject to the, elementary need for order without which the guarantee of those rights would be a mockery . The expression has number been define  in the Constitution, but it occurs in List II of its Seventh Schedule and is also inserted by the Constitution  First Amendment  Act, 1951 in el.  2  of Art. The sense in which it is used in Art. 19 can only be appreciates by ascertaining how the Article was companystrued before it was inserted therein and what was the defect to remedy which the Parliament inserted the same by the said amendment. The impact of el.  2  of Art. 19 on Art. 19 1  a  before the said amendment was subject to judicial scrutiny by this Court in Romesh Thappar v. The State of Madras l . There the Government of Madras, in exercise of their powers under s. 9 1-A  of the Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act, 1949, purported to issue an order whereby they imposed a ban upon the entry and circulation of the journal called Cross -.Roads in that State. The petitioner therein companytended that the said order companytravened his fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression. At the time when that order was issued the  expression public order was number in Art. 19 2  of the Constitution but the words the security of the State were there. In companysidering whether the impugned Act was made in the interests of security of the State, Patanjali Sastri, J., as he then was, after citing the observation of Stephen in his Criminal Law of England, states  1  1950  S.C.R.