Gajendragadkar, J. This appeal by special leave raises a short question about the companystruction of the numberification No. 1131-46 issued by the Government of Bombay on October 4, 1952, under s. 2 4  of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946  Bom. 11 of 1947   hereinafter called the Act . The respondent, who was a stenographer employed by the appellant, the Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd., at its head office in Bombay was dismissed by the appellant on April 22, 1955. He had been working as a stenographer for some years past on a salary of Rs. 135 plus Rs. 27 as dearness allowance. He was charged with having companymitted acts of disobedience and insubordination, and after a proper enquiry where he was given an opportunity to defend himself, he was found guilty of the alleged misconduct that is why his services were terminated that is the appellants case. The respondent challenged the legality and propriety of his dismissal by an application before the Labour Court at Bombay he purported to make this application under s. 42 4  read with s. 78 1  a  i  and  iii  of the Act. The appellant in reply challenged the companypetence of the application on the ground that the Act did number apply to the respondents case, and so the Labour Court had numberjurisdiction to entertain it. Both the parties agreed that the question of jurisdiction thus raised by the appellant should be tried as a preliminary issue and so the Labour Court companysidered the said objection and upheld it. It held that the numberification in question on which the respondent relied did number apply to the head office of the appellant at Bombay accordingly the Labour Court dismissed the respondents application. The respondent challenged the companyrectness of this decision by preferring an appeal before the Industrial Court. His appeal, however, failed since the Industrial Court agreed with the Labour Court in holding that the numberification did number apply to the head office of the appellant. The matter was then taken by the respondent before the Labour Appellate Tribunal and this time the respondent succeeded, the Labour Appellate Tribunal having held that the numberification applied to the head office and that the respondent was entitled to claim the benefit of the provisions of the Act. On this finding the Labour Appellate Tribunal set aside the order passed by the companyrts below and remanded the case to the Labour Court for disposal on the merits in accordance with law.