CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 135 of 1961. Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated January 3, 1961, of the Rajasthan High Court, Jodhpur, in Civil Writ Petition No. 1 of 1961. K. Nambiar, R. K. Garg, D. P. Singh, M. K. Ramamurthi and C. Agarwala, for the appellant petitioner. N. Sanyal, Additional Solicitor-General of India, C. C. Kasliwal, Advocate-General of Rajasthan, Khan Singh and D. Gupta, for the respondents. 1961. April 14. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by WANCHOO, J.-These two companynected matters arise out of an order approving a scheme framed under Chap. IV-A of the Motor Vehicles Act, No. IV of 1939,  hereinafter referred to as the Act  and will be disposed of together. The brief facts necessary for present purposes are these. The appellant was plying a bus between Jaipur and Ajmer on a permit granted to him for three years by resolution of the Regional Transport Authority, Jaipur, dated December 16/17, 1958. In August, 1960, the State Government promulgated rules under s. 68-1 of the Act, called the Rajasthan State Road Transport Services  Development  Rules, 1960  hereinafter called the Rules . The Rules were framed for carrying out the purposes of Chap. IV-A of the Act and provided inter alia for framing of schemes, hearing of objections, determination and payment of companypensation, and other incidental matters. A draft scheme was published on September 7, 1960, for taking over the Jaipur-Ajmer route. The appellant made objections to the draft scheme within the time allowed by the numberification thereof. The State Government appointed the Legal Remembrancer to hear and decide the objections under r. 7 of the Rules. It appears that in the meantime an application was made under Art. 226 by some bus operators before the Rajasthan High Court challenging the companystitutionality of s. 68-D of the Act and the legality of the Rules framed by the State Government. This application was dismissed and the High Court inter alia decided while companysidering r. 7 6  that it was number open to the officer hearing the objections to cancel the draft scheme and seems to have held that there was numbersuch power even under s. 68-D 2  of the Act. This decision was given on November 9, 1960. The draft scheme came up for companysideration before the officer appointed to hear objections on November 21,, 1960. An application was made before him that the appellant should be permitted to give evidence on points of fact which were narrated in the application in order that the officer may be in a position to decide the objections justly. This application was rejected by the officer on the ground that there was numberprovision in the Rules for recording of evidence of witnesses. The matter then came up for companysideration on November 23, 1960. On that date another application was made in which it was said that the appellant wanted to lead evidence to show that the draft scheme must be rejected in its entirety, and it was companytended that the view taken by the Rajasthan High Court to the effect that it was number open to the officer to cancel a draft scheme was incorrect. This application was also rejected by the officer with the observation that he was bound hand and foot by the decision of the Rajasthan High Court and if there was anything wrong in the interpretation given by the High Court the remedy lay elsewhere. Thereafter the officer gave a hearing to the appellant in the sense that he heard arguments on behalf of the appellant and approved the draft scheme by his order dated December 7, 1960. The approved scheme was then published on December 12,1960. On January 9, 1961, the Regional Transport Authority informed the appellant that his permit was cancelled, as from January 26, 1961, or such later date from which the buses of Rajasthan State Roadways begin to operate on the above-mentioned route. In the meantime, the appellant unsuccessfully moved the Rajasthan High Court, and his prayer for leave to appeal to this Court was also rejected. The appellant then applied for special leave to appeal to this Court which was granted and that is how the matter has companye up before us. Two main points have been urged before us on behalf of the appellant, namely,  i  the officer was wrong in the view he took that it was number open to him to reject the draft scheme in its entirety, and  ii  the officer was wrong in holding that he companyld number take evidence, whether oral or documentary, and all that he had to do under s. 68-D of the Act was to hear arguments on either side. It is companytended that in view of these two wrong decisions of the officer his approach to what he had to do in dealing with objections under s. 68-D was quite incorrect., with the result that there was numbereffective hearing of the objections and any approval given to the scheme in these circumstances is liable to be set aside and the appellant is entitled to be heard in the real sense in which those words were used in s. 68-D  2 . Re.  i . Section 68-D  2  with which we are companycerned is in these words- The State Government may, after companysidering the objections and after giving an opportunity to the objector or his representatives and the representatives of the State transport undertaking to be heard in the matter, if they so desire, approve or modify the scheme.