CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 515 of 1960. Appeal from the judgment and order dated September 3, 1958, of the Punjab High Court in Letters Patent Appeal No. 82 of 1957. Bhagat Singh Chawla and K. R. Choudhri, for the appellant. M Sikri, Advocate-General for the State of Punjab, Gopal Singh and P. D. Menon, for the respondents. 1961. December II. The Judgment of Gajendragadkar, Subba Rao, Hidayatullah and Shah, JJ., was delivered by SHAH, J.-Sardar Gian Singh-hereinafter Called the appellant- was recruited in 1927 as a Naib Tehsildar in the Revenue department of the Province of Punjab. He was companyfirmed in that rank in 1939. In 1946, he was promoted to the rank of officiating Tehsildar and was posted as Tehsildar at Hansi in the district of Hissar on September 22, 1947, and since then he held the post of Tehsildar at diverse places. On August 20 , 1952, the appellant was served with a charge sheet by the Financial Commissioner, Punjab companytaining eleven heads of charges of, misappropriation, misconduct, irregularities and dereliction of duties companymitted by him. The Deputy Commissioner, Hissar was appointed to hold a departmental enquiry into those charges. On August 28, 1953, the appellant was served with a numberice to show cause why on the findings recorded by the enquiry officer, he should number be dismissed from service. The appellant submitted hi, explanation. The Financial Commissioner by order dated October 26, 1953 ordered that the appellant be dismissed from service. An appeal preferred against that order was dismissed and application to the Government of Punjab to revise the order of the appellate authority also proved infructuous. The appellant then presented a petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution to the High Court of Punjab for an order quashing the order of dismissal company- tending inter alia that  a  reasonable opportunity was number given to the appellant either before the enquiry officer or before the Financial Commissioner to rebut the allegations companytained in the charge sheet, and  b  that the Financial Commissioner was incompetent to pass the order of dismissal. Bishan Narain, J., who heard the petition rejected the first plea, but in the view of the learned Judge, the Financial Commissioner ceased to have any power to make rules regulating the appointment and dismissal of Tehsildars because of the amendment of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 by the Government of India  Adaptation of Indian Laws  Order, 1937 and the authority derived by the Financial Commissioner under those rules to dismiss Tehsildars was also abrogated, and therefore the order of the Financial Commissioner dated October 26, 1953 was void and of numbereffect. In appeal under cl. 10 of the Letters Patent, a Division Bench of the High Court reversed the order passed by the Bishan Narain, J. The High Court held that by virtue of, cls. 9 and 10 of the Government of India  Adaptation of Indian Laws  Order, 1937, the rules framed under the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 companytinued to remain in operation even after the Act was amended by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order, 1937 and the Financial Commissioner remained invested with the power to dismiss the appellant from service. The High Court accordingly dismissed the petition of the appellant. The appellant has appealed to this Court against the order of the High Court with certificates of fitness under Art. 133 of the Constitution. Section 9 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, as it was originally enacted, stood as follows The Provincial Government shall fix the number of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars to be appointed, and the Financial Commissioner may make rules for their appointment and dismissal. Under s. 9 read with s. 28 of the Act, rules were framed in 1932 by the Financial Commissioner, Punjab, and authority to appoint Tehsildars and to remove them from service was, by these rules, companyferred upon the Financial Commissioner. After the enactment of the Government of India Act, 1935, s. 9 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act was amended by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order, 1937, and the power of the Financial Commissioner to make rules under s. 9 was abrogated by the deletion of the words in that section following the word appointed. Section 28 which authorised the Financial Commissioner to make rules to regulate appointments, duties, emoluments, punishments etc. of officers amongst others of Kanungos, Zaildars, Inamdars and village officers, was also amended and that power was entrusted to the Provincial Government. Undoubtedly, by the amendment of s. 9, the Financial Commissioner was deprived of the power to make rules for appointment and removal of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars, and on account of the repeal, except as to transactions past and companypleted, the power may in the absence of a provision to the companytrary, be companysidered as if it had never existed. But the vitality of the Tehsildari Rules and of the powers of the authorities companypetent thereunder after the Government of India Act, 1935 was enacted, rested upon certain provisions made by virtue of the authority companyferred by that Act. By s.310 of the Act, to facilitate the transition from the Government of India Act, 1915 and from the provisions of Part XIII. of the Act of 1935 to the provisions of Part 11, power was companyferred upon His Majesty, by Order-in-Council among others to direct that the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, shall, during such limited period as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such adaptations and modifications as may be so specified. In exercise of this power, on July 3, 1936, the Government of India  Commencement and Transitory Provisions  Order, 1936 was promulgated and by el. 15 2  it was provided Until other provision is made under the number Act, the companyditions of service applicable to any person or any class of persons appointed or to be appointed to serve His Majesty in a civil capacity in India shall be the same as were applicable to that person or, as the case may be, to persons of that class immediately before the companymencement of Part III of the new Act. By el. 12 d  of the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order, 1937 issued in exercise of authority granted by s. 293, it was provided, in so far as it is material, that No repeal effected by this order shall affect the operation of sub-paragraph  2  of paragraph fifteen of the Government of India,  Commencement and Transitory Provisions  Order, 1936. By the companybined operation of cl. 15 2  of the Commencement and Transitory Provisions Order, 1936 and the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order, 1937, the companyditions of service applicable to civil servants companytinued to remain unaltered, until other provisions were made under the Government of India Act, 1935. Again, the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order, 1937 expressly provided by cl. 9 that the rules framed under the Act-adapted or modified shall number be rendered invalid. By that clause which provided The provisions of this order which adapt or modify Indian laws so as to alter the manner in which, the authority by which, or the law under or in accordance with which, any powers are exercisable, shall number render invalid any numberification, order, companymitment, attachment,, bye-law, rule or regulation duly made or issued, or anything duly done, before the companymencement of this order Notwithstanding the abrogation of the powers of the Financial Commissioner to frame rules, the Tehsildari Rules, 1932 remained in force. And by cl. 10 which provided Save as provided by this order, all powers which under any law in force in British India, or in any part of British India, were immediately before the companymencement of part III of the Government of India Act, 1935 vested in, or exercisable by, any person or authority shall companytinue to be so vested or exercisable until other provision is made by some legislature or authority empowered to regulate the matter in question. The authority of the Financial Commissioner under the rules which remained in force by virtue of cl. 9 was exercisable except as provided by the Adaptation of Indian Laws order, 1937. By s. 241  2  of the Government of India Act, 1935, the companyditions of service, in the case of persons serving in companynection with the affairs of a Province, were to be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Governor, or by persons authorised to make rules for that purpose. But this provision was, till other- provisions were made, subject to cl. 15  2  of the Commencement and Transitory Provisions Order, 1936. Clause 7 of the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order on which reliance was placed by companynsel for the appellant in support of his companytention that the Governor alone companyld exercise the powers of dismissal under the Rules because he was the companyresponding authority, does number also assist the appellant. The clause applies only to those cases where an authority companypetent at the date of passing of any Indian law, to exercise any powers or authorities or discharge any functions, ceased to exist and a companyresponding new authority was companystituted by or under any Part of the Government of India Act, 1935 the clause did number apply where only the powers of an authority were vested in another authority, the former authority number otherwise ceasing to function. The companydition of service of civil servants having remained unaltered even after the Government of India Act, 1935 was brought into operation by virtue of the Commencement and Transitory Provisions Order 1936, and the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order having made express provision saving the rules as well as the authority granted under the rules to the Financial Commissioner, the order of the Financial Commissioner dismissing the appellant from service was number unauthorised. The companytention of companynsel for the appellant that by the enactment of s. 241 of the Government of India Act, 1935, civil servants serving a Province companyld be dismissed after that Act was brought into operation only by the Governor of the Province and by numberother authority has therefore numberforce. Counsel submitted that in any event, fresh rules governing the civil services in the Punjab having been framed in 1941 by the Government of the Province of Punjab, the Tehsildari Rules, 1932 even if they were number superseded by the amend- ment made by the Adaptation of Indian laws Order, 1937 in the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 stood expressly repealed, and the powers of the Financial Commissioner to dismiss a Tehsildar companyld number thereafter, be exercised. But the plea that fresh rules were framed in 1941 in supersession of the Punjab Tesbsildari Rules, 1932 was number advanced in the High Court. In 1941, fresh Civil Services Rules applicable to the Punjab were undoubtedly promulgated it is however unnecessary to companysider whether under the Punjab Civil Service Rules, 1941 the Governor alone was companypetent to dismiss from service a public servant of the Provincial Service or subordinate Service or officers holding special posts or any other Government servant or class of Government servants to whom those rules applied. It was expressly enacted in r. 1 4 that the Civil Services Rules were number to apply to any person for whose appointments and companyditions of service special provision was made by or under any law for the time being in force. Special provision did in fact exist for the appointments and Condition of service of Tehsildars Under the law for the time being in force and those rules are number shown to have been superseded or abrogated by the Civil Services Rules. Counsel for the appellant asserted that Tehsildars belonged to the Subordinate Services, Class III, and the rules framed in 1941 under s. 241 of the Government of India Act superseded the Tehsildari Rules, of 1932. The Advocate General appearing for the State of Punjab submitted that Tehsildars were number included in the Subordinate Services, because numbernotification in that behalf was issued. As we have already observed, the question as to the effect of the rules framed in 1941 under s. 241 of the Government of India Act was never raised or argued before Bishan Narain, J., number before the High Court in appeal. It is difficult for this Court to entertain any plea depending for its adjudications on numberifications said to be issued by the Government from time to time, raised for the first time in appeal, when such numberifications have never been brought to our numberice. On the whole, we are of the view that the record does number support the companytention that the Punjab Tehsildari Rules were number in operation at the date of dismissal. There is also numberhing to show that the Financial Commissioner was number invested at the material time with the power to dismiss a Tehsildar. The appeal therefore fails and is dismissed with companyts. RAGHUBAR DAYAL, J.-I regret my inability to agree with the view that the Punjab Tehsildari Rules of 1932 applied to the service of Tehsildars and Naib Tebsildars in 1953. The appellant was an officiating Tehsildar in 1953 in the State of Punjab, when he was dismissed by the Financial Commissioner, Punjab, on October 26, 1953. Having failed to get the order changed as a result of his appeal and a revision to the Government, be field a petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Punjab and prayed for his reinstatement from the date of his dismissal by the issue of an appropriate writ. Among the grounds in support of his prayer, the petition mentioned that the Financial Commissioner was number companypetent authority to order the dismissal of a Tehsildar in view of Rule 2.14 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules,  hereinafter called the Civil Services Rules , read with Chapter XV, the Rules being framed under Art. 309 of the Constitution. It was companytended on behalf of the State that the petitioners terms and companyditions of service were governed by the Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1932  hereinafter called the Tehsildari Rules  which empowered the Financial Commissioner to appoint and dismiss Tehsildars. Bishan Narain, J., who heard the petition, allowed it holding that the Tehsildari Rules ceased to operate since the amendment of s. 9 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887  Act.XVII of 1887 , hereinafter called the Revenue Act , by the Government of India  Adaptation of Indian Laws  Order, 1937,  hereinafter called the adaptation Order , which deleted that part of the section which empowered the Financial Commissioner to make rules for the appointment and removal of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars, and inthe exercise of which power the Tehsildari Rules had been made by the Financial Commissioner, there being numberhing in the Government of India Act, 1935,  hereinafter called the Act  or in the Adaptation Order preserving the validity of these Rules numberwithstanding the repeal of the relevant provision in s. 9 of the Revenue Act. He observed in his order It is numberodys case that the Punjab Civil Service Rules made after the 1935 Act Contain any provision which keeps these rules of 1932 alive and in force. Neither is it the respondents case that after the amendment of Section 9 of the Punjab Act the Governor or the Provincial Government ever delegated the power of appointments and dismissals of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars to the Finan- cial Commissioner. The Tehsildari Rules, therefore, according to him, being inoperative after the companymencement of the Act, companyld number have become operative under the Constitution, by virtue of the provisions of Art. 372 of the Constitution. Holding that the Civil Services Rules which governed all States services governed the services of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars and that numberhing in those Rules empowered the Financial Commissioner to appoint or dismiss a Tehsildar, he allowed the petition, ordering that the appellants dismissal was void and of numberlegal effects. The State preferred a Letters Patent Appeal. The grounds of appeal mentioned that the Tebsildari Rules were in force on January 25, 1950, in view of ss. 292 and 293 of the Act and also s. 18  3  of the Indian Independence Act, and thereafter under Art. 372 of the Constitution, and that the finding that the companyditions of service of Tehsildars were governed by the Civil Services Rules was wrong. The appellate judgement companysidered that the Tehsildari Rules were made either in The exercise of the powers companyferred by the Government of India Act, 1919, or in the exercise of the powers companyferred by the Revenue Act, and came to the companyclusion that in the former case they companytinued to be effective rules in view of s. 276 of the Act, and Art. 313 of the Constitution, it being number shown that those rules had been replaced by another set of rules or those rules were inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or the Constitu- tion and that in the latter case the rules companytinued to be in force by virtue of paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Adaptation Order which made it clear that the Financial Commissioner who had the power to appoint or dismiss a Tehsildar companytinued to exercise those powers, those powers having been number abrogated or withdrawn. The Letters Patent Appeal was companysequently allowed and the writ petition was dismissed. It is against this order that the appellant has filed this appeal by certificate granted by the High Court. It is companytended for the appellant that the Tehsildari Rules ceased to be operative from the companymencement of the Act and in any case, ceased to be operative from the 1st of April 1941 when the Civil Services Rules made by the Governor came into force and that therefore the Financial Commissioner was number companypetent to dismiss the appellant. It has number been urged for the respondent in this Court that the Tehsildari Rules were framed under the Government of India Act of 1919 and that therefore they companytinued to be in force in view of s. 276 of the Act, and Art. 313 of the Constitution. The companytention, even if it had been raised, companyld number have succeeded, as a Rule empowering a Financial Commissioner to appoint and dismiss Tehsildars companyld number have been companysistent with the provisions of s. 241 of the Act which laid down that, except as expressly provided by the Act, appointments to the Civil services or any civil posts under the Crown in India would be made in the case of services of a province and posts in companynection with the affairs of a province by the Governor or such persons as he may direct. It has number been urged before us, that the Government aid, subsequent to the enforcement of the Act pass any order empowering the Financial Commissioner to appoint and dismiss Tehsildars. The order of the Financial Commissioner was supported on behalf of the State on the provisions of paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Adaptation Order of 1937 and rule 1.4 of the Civil Services Rules, 1941, and at the further hearing, in companynec- tion with the effect of paragraph 7 of that Order to which numberreference had been made at the first hearing, on the provisions of cl.  2  paragraph 15 of Government of India  Commencement and Transitory Provisions  Order, 1936  hereinafter called the Transitory, Order , and paragraph 12 of the Adaptation Order. The companytention really is that the Tehsildari Rules companytinued to be valid both in view of paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Adaptation Order and the Transitory Order till such time as the Governor made the new rules and that the Tehsildari Rules companytinued to be in force after the 1st of April 1941 since the Tehsildars were persons for whose appointment and companyditions of service special provision had been made under those rules. I shall first deal with the effect of the provisions of the Adaptation Order on the Tehsildari Rules. Section 292 of the Act reads Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of the Government of India Act, but subject to the other provisions of this Act, all the law in force in British India immediately before the companymencement of part III of this Act shall companytinue in force in British India until altered or repealed or amended by a companypetent Legislature or other companypetent authority. Section 293 of the Act reads His Majesty may by Order in Council to be made at any time after the passing of this Act provide that, as from such date as may be specified in the Order, any law in force in British India or in any part of British India shall until repealed or amended by a companypetent Legislature or other companypetent authority, have effect subject to such adaptations and modifications as appear to His Majesty to be necessary or, expedient for bringing the provisions of that law into accord with the provisions of this Act and, in particular, into accord with the provisions thereof which reconstitute under different names governments and authorities in India and prescribe the distribution of legislative and executive powers between the Federation and the Provinces Provided that numbersuch law as aforesaid shall be made applicable to any Federated State by an Order in Council made under this section. In this section the expression law does number include an Act of Parliament, but includes any ordinance, Order, bye-law, rule or regulation having in British India the force of law. It is in the exercise of the power companyferred by this section that the Adaptation Order was issued.