CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Criminal Appeal No. 218 of 1959. Appeal by special leave from the Judgment and order dated September 8, 1959, of the Punjab High Court in Criminal Appeal No.354 of 1959. Frank Anthony, K. C. Agarwala and P. C. Agarwala for the appellant. K. Khanna and P. D. Menon, for the respondent. 1962. August 21. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by SHAH, J.--After arguments were companycluded in this appeal we ordered that the appellant Narain Singh be acquitted of the offence under s. 304 Part II of the Indian Penal Code of which he wag companyvicted and the sentence passed on him be set aside. We proceed to set out our reasons in support of the order. Narain Singh and his three nephews-Mehar Singh, Mewa Singh and Pakhar Singh-were tried before the Court of Session, Ludhiana for offences punishable under s. 302 read with s. 34. of the Indian Penal Code, on the charge that on October 31, 1958, they had in furtherance of their companymon intention caused the death of one Bachan Singh by making a murderous assault on him. The prosecution case was that in the evening of October 31, 1958, when Narain Singh and his three nephews were irrigating their field, Bachan Singh diverted the flow of water into his own filed. Narain Singh and his nephews were thereupon enraged, and there was a quarrel between them and Bachan Singh. Narain Singh and his nephews made an attack upon Bachan Singh with a kaholi, caused him serious injuries. According to the prosecution, Mehar Singh at the time of the assault was armed with a spear, Pakhar Singh with a Kaholi, Mewa Singh with a salang and Narain Singh with a stick. A Complaint was lodged about the assault with the Notice, and Bachan Singh was removed to the Civil Hospital, Ludhiana. The Sub-Inspector of Police investigating the case recorded the statement of Bachan Singh, and a First Class Magistrate of Ludhiana recorded his declaration on the evening of November 2, 1958. Bachan Singh died on November 3, 1958. Narain Singh and his nephwes were then prosecuted before the Court of Session Ludhiana for the offence of murder. At the trial, Narain Singh-pleaded that he bad acted in exercise of the right of self defence and had caused injuries to Bachan Singh because the latter had thrown him down and had attempted to strangulate him. His statement in the Court of Session, on which he was companyvicted, was as follows - The companyrect facts are that when I objected to the deceased cutting the nakka he caught hold of me and threw me on the ground. I was alone at the time. The other three companyaccused were number with me. After I had fallen on the ground the deceased attempted to strangulate me. I was then wearing small kirpan. I unsheathed it and used it in self defence causing a companyple of injuries to the deceased on the alarm raised by me, Mehar Singh  my company accused  who was companying from the khal nearby, came to the spot and rescued me. He was armless and did number cause any injury to the deceased. I did number carry any stick but was wearing a small kirpan as usual. Pakhar Singh and Mews Singh denied their presence at the scene of offence. Mehar Singh claimed that he was present at the scene, and he had tried to intervene and separate Bachan Singh and Narain Singh. Narain Singh and Mehar Singh relied upon the circumstance that they also bad injuries on their person which were numbericed when they were medically examined. Narain Singh had six companytused injuries and Mehr Singh had one incised injury and four abraded companytusions. Before the Court of Session, Jagir Singh-a witness for the prosecution made important variations in his story as originally related by him in his companyplaint at the police station. Kaka, who, it was claimed by the prosecution, was an eye-witness, did number support the case for the prosecution. Hakku, another witness, was number examined by the prosecutor, but was merely tendered for cross-examination. One Johri whose name was number mentioned in the companyplaint was also examined by the prosecutor. Two statements of Bachan Singh which were in view of his death admissible as dying declarations-one recorded by the Investigating Officer and the other by the First Class Magistrate, Ludhiana-were also tendered in evidence. The Sessions Judge held that the evidence of Jagir Singh was unreliable and That Johri companyld number have witnessed the assault. The two dying declarations were. in the view of the Judge, unreliable, for Bachan Singh had before he made the statements ample opportunity to know how the investigation was proceeding, had companysulted Jagir Singh and had opportunity of discussing with him the case to be set up. Again, the story set up in the dying declarations furnished numberexplanation of the injuries received by Narain Singh and Mehar Singh. The medical evidence was also number helpful to the case for the prosecution.