CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeals Nos. 98 and 99 of 1960. Appeal from the judgment and order dated April 16, 1958, and April 11, 1958, of the Calcutta High Court in Appeal from Original Order and decree Nos. 173 and 151 of 1957, respectively. N. Sanyal, Additional Solicitor-General of Indin, M. G. Poddar and D. N. Mukherjee, for the appellant. B. Aggarwala and S. N. Mukherjee, for the respondent. 1962. May 4. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by VENKATARAMA AIYAR, J.-These are appeals against the judgment of the High Court of Calcutta, setting aside an award of the arbitrators, which directed the respondent to pay to the appellants Rs. 41,250 as companypensation for breach of companytract, on the ground that the said companytract was in company- travention of a numberification of the Central Government dated October 29, 1953, and was in companysequence illegal and void. The facts are that the appellants own a Jute Mill at Calcutta and carry on the business of manufacture and sale of Jute. On September 7, 1955 they entered into a companytract with the respondents who are doing business as dealers in jute, for the purchase of 750 bales of Jute cutting raw  of Pakistan at Rs. 80 per bale of 400 lbs. to be delivered in October, November and December at the rate of 250 belles every month. Clause 14 of the agreement provides that all disputes arising out of or companycerning the companytract should be referred to the arbitration of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce. The respondents failed to deliver the goods as agreed whereupon the appellants applied to the Bengal Chamber of Commerce for arbitration in accordance with el. 14 of the agreement. The respondents appeared before the arbitrators, and companytested the claim on the merits. The arbitrators made an award in favour of the appellants for Rs. 41,250 with interest, and that was filed under s. 14 2  of the Indian Arbitration Act in the High Court of Calcutta in its original side and numberice was issued to the respondents. Thereupon the respondents filed an application in the High Court, presumably under s. 33 of the arbitration Act, wherein they prayed for a declaration that the companytract dated September 7, 1955, was illegal, as it was in companytravention of the numberification of the Central Government dated October 29, 1953, and that in companysequence proceedings taken thereunder before the Chamber of Commerce and the award in which they resulted were all void. The learned Judge on the original side before whom the application came up for hearing dismissed it, and passed a decree in terms of the award. Against both this judgment and order, the respondents preferred appeals to a Division Bench of the High Court, Appeals Nos. 154 and 173 of 1957. They were heard by Chakravartti, C. J., and Lahari, J., who hold that the companytract dated September 7, 1955, was illegal as it fell within the prohibition of the numberification aforesaid and accordingly allowed the appeal and set aside the award. The appellants then applied for a certificate under Art. 133  1  of the Constitution and the same was granted. This is how the appeals companye before us. The learned Additional Solicitor-General who appeared for the appellants urged the following companytentions - On the terms of the arbitration clause the questionwhether the companytract dated September 7. 1955, isillegal is one for the arbitrator to decide and that it was number open to the respondents to raise the same in the present proceedings under s. 33 of the Arbitration Act, The respondents are estopped from questioning the validity of the award by reason of their having submitted to the jurisdiction of the arbitrators. The agreement dated September 7. 1955, is a number- transferable specific delivery companytract within s. 2 f  of the Act and it is number hit by the numberification dated October 29, 1953. We number proceed to discuss these questions seriatim Taking up the first questions, cl, 14 of the agreement which provides for arbitration is as follows - All the matters, questions, disputes, differences and or claims arising out of and/ or companycerning and or in companynection with and/ or in companysequence of or relating to this company- tract including matters relating to insurance and demurrage whether or number the obligations of either or both parties under this companytract be subsisting at the time of such dispute and whether or number this companytract has been termi- nated or purported to be terminated or company- pleted shall be referred to the arbitration of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce and Industry under the rules of its Tribunal of Arbitration for the time being in force and according to such rules the arbitration shall be companyducted and any Award made by the said Tribunal under the clause. shall be final, binding and companyclusive on the parties. Now the companytention of the appellants is that the clause is general in its terms and is wide enough to include dispute as to the validity of the companytract that in companysequence the only right of the respondents is to agitate this question before the arbitrators and if the award goes against them to move the Court either to modify it under s. 15 of the Arbitration Act or to remit it under s. 16 or to set it aside under s. 30 on the grounds mentioned therein and that the present application for a declaration that the companytract is illegal, and that the arbitration proceedings are without jurisdiction is therefore incompetent and misconceived. it cannot be disputed that the expression arising out of or companycerning or in companynection with or in companysequence of or relating to this companytract occurring in el. 14 are of sufficient amplitude to take in a dispute as to the validity of the agreement dated September 7, 1955 Vide Ruby General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Pearey Lal ,Kumar  1  But the question is number whether el. 14 is all companyprehensive but whether it companyld be enforced when the agreement of which it forms an integral part is held to be illegal. Logically speaking, it is difficult to companyceive how when an agreement found to be bad, any portion of it can held to be good. When the whole perishes, its parts also must perish. Ex nihilo nil fit. On principle therefore it must be held that when an agreement is invalid every part of it including the clause as to arbitration companytained therein must also be invalid. That indeed is what has been laid down in the decisions which have been cited before us. The leading case on the subject is the decision of the House of Lords in Heyman v. Dacwins Ltd 1 . There the question was whether repudiation of a companytract by a party thereto had the effect of annulling the arbitration clause companytained therein. It was held that it had number. It was in this companytext that the law as to the circumstances under which an arbitration clause in an agreement would become unenforceable came in for elaborate discussion. Summing up the law on the subject Viscount Simon, L. C. observed If the dispute is whether the companytract which companytains the clause has ever been entered into at all, that issue cannot go to arbitration under the clause, for the party who denies that he has ever entered into the companytract is thereby denying that he has ever joined in the submission. Similarly, if one party to the alleged companytract is companytending that it is void ab initio  because, for ,example, the making of such a companytract is illegal , the arbitration clause cannot operate, for on this view the clause itself also is void. But, in a situation where the parties are at one in asserting that they entered into a binding companytract, but a difference has arisen between them whether there has been breach by one side or the other, or whether circumstances have arisen which have discharged one or both parties from further performance, such differences should be regarded as differences which have arisen in respect of or with regard to or, under the companytract, and an arbitration clause which. uses these. or similar, expressions ,should be companystrued accordingly.  1   1942  A.C. 356. Lord Macmillan with whom Lord Russel agreed observed If it appears that the dispute is whether there has ever been a binding companytract between the parties, such a dispute cannot be companyered by an arbitration clause in the challenged company- tract. If there has never been a companytract at all, there has never been as part of it an agreement to arbitrate. The greater includes the less. Further, a claim to set aside a companytract on such grounds as fraud, duress or essential error cannot be the subject matter of a reference under an arbitration clause in the companytract sought to be set aside. in the speech of Lord Wright there are the following observations on which the appellants rely Hence, if the question is whether the alleged companytract was void for illegality or being voidable was avoided because induced by fraud or misrepresentation, or on the ground of mistake, it depends on the terms of the submission whether the dispute falls within the arbitrators jurisdiction. The argument is that if the arbitration clause is general and unqualified it will include a question as to the legality of a companytract also. The above observation does lend support to the view that if it was a term of the companytract that a dispute as to its legality companyld be referred to arbitration, then it is valid. If that is what was meant by Lord Wright it maybe difficult to reconcile it with the view expressed in the passages already cited. But it is to be numbered that the numberle Lord wound up with the following observation Finally, I agree with the general companyclusions on the matter summarised by the Lord Chancellor in the closing paragraphs of his opinion. The appellants also rely on the following observations in the speech of Lord Porter If two parties purports to enter into a companytract and a dispute arises whether they have done so or number, or whether the alleged companytract is binding on them. I see numberreason why .-hey should number submit that dispute to arbitration. Equally I see numberreason why, if at the time when they purport, to make the companytract they foresee the possibility of such a dispute arising, they should number provide in the companytract itself for the submission to arbitration of a dispute whether the companytract ever bound them or companytinues to do so It may require very clear language to effect this result, and it may be true to say that such a companytract is really companylateral to the agreement supposed to have been made, but I do number see why it should number be done. But these dicta must be read with the following observations in the same speech Where the companytract itself is repudiated in the sense that the original existence or its binding force is challenged, e. g., where it is said that the parties never were ad idem, or where it is said that the companytract is voidable ab initio  e. g., in cases of fraud, misrepresentation or mistake  and that it has been avoided, the parties are number bound by any companytract and escape the obligation to perform any of its terms including the arbitration clause unless the provisions of that clause are wide enough to include the question of jurisdiction According to Lord Porter, then there can be an agreement to refer a dispute as to the validity of a companytract to arbitration, that where such an agreement is part of the companytract which is impugned as invalid, then it can have numberexistence apart from it and there can be numberreference based thereon, but where such an agreement is distinct and separate from the impugned companytract. a reference pursuant thereto will be valid and if is possible that both these agreements might be companytained in one document. The law is thus summarised in Halsburys Laws of England, Third Edition, Vol. 2, p. 24,. par 56 The matter in question in the legal proceedings which it is sought to stay must be within the scope of the arbitration agreement If, however, the point in dispute is whether the companytract companytaining the clause was ever entered into at all, or was void ab initio, illegal, or obtained  for example  by fraud duress or undue influence, the clause does number apply and a stay will be refused. This question arose incidentally for discussion in the Union of India v. Kishorilal Gupta and Brothers 1  where on an examination of the authorities, including Heyman v. Darwins Ltd.  2  this Court held that an arbitration clause embodied in an agreement is an integral part thereof and that it that agreement is number est either because. it was never legally in existence or because it was void ab initio., then the arbitration clause would also perish with it. Similar decisions had been given in Tolaram Nathmull v. Birla Jute Mfg. Company Ltd. 3  and Hussain Kasam Dada v. Vijayanagaram Commercial Association 4 . Reference might in this companynection be made to s. 33 of the Arbitration Act which enacts that a party to an arbitration agreement who desires to challenge the existence or validity of an arbitration agreement should apply to the Court for determination of the question. This section represents the law on the subject as understood in England at the time of that legislation and as declared later by the House of Lords in Heyman v. Darwins Ltd.  2 . The scope of s. 33 came up for companysideration before this Court in Shiva Jute Baling Ltd. v. Hindley Co. Ltd.  5 . There a petition had been filed under that section praying inter alia for a declaration that the companytract between the parties companytaining an  1  1960 1 S.C.R. 493.  2  I. L.R. 1948 2 Cal. 171.  3   A.I.R. 1945 Mad. 528. 531.  4  1960 1 S.C.R. 569.  5   1861  30 Law. J. Rep.  N.S.  Banks. 10. arbitration clause, was void ab initio on the ground of uncertainty and that there was in fact numbercontract owing to mutual mistake and it was held that these were questions for decision by Courts and number by arbitrators. We are accordingly of the opinion that the dispute that the companytract dated September 7, 1955, is illegal and void is number one which the arbitrators are companypetent to decide under cl. 14 and that inconsequence the respondents are entitled to maintain the present application under s. 33 of the Arbitration Act. It is next companytended for the appellants ,that even if cl. 14 should be held to be inoperative by reason of the fact that the dispute is one relating to the validity of the companytract, the respondents are estopped from number challenging the award on that ground, because they appeared before the arbitrators and took part in the proceedings before them. The decision in Ex p. Wyld  1  is relied on in support of this companytention. In that case a dispute between an assignee in bankruptcy and a creditor, Mr. Wyld, was referred to arbitration on the, basis of an agreement in writing between them. An award having been pronounced against Mr. Wyld, he disputed its validity on the ground that the assignee had number obtained the leave of the Court for entering into the arbitration. In rejecting this companytention the Court observed that under the law the agreement was binding on Mr. Wyld even though the leave of the Court was number obtained and that therefore he was number entitled to take this objection based on the informality of the submission as he had himself acted on it. This decision is clearly of numberassistance to the appellants because there was a valid and subsisting submission on which the jurisdiction of the arbitrators to bear the dispute was companyplete, and that was number affected by the failure of the assignee to obtain the requisite  1   1861  30 Law J. Ref.  N.S.  Bankr. 10. leave because that was a matter between him and the Court. But here if the agreement dated September 7, 1955, is void then there was numbersubmission which was alive on which the arbitrators companyld act and the proceedings before them would be wholly without jurisdiction. If there had been another arbitration agreement apart from and independent of cl. 14 of the companytract dated September 7, 1955, it might have been possible to sustain the proceedings before the arbitrators as referable to that agreement. But numbere such has been set up or proved in the present case. All that is alleged is that the respondents acquiesced in the proceedings. But what companyfers jurisdiction on the arbitrators to hear and decide a dispute is an arbitration agreement as defined in s. 2 a  of the Arbitration Act, and where there is numbersuch agreement, there is an initial want of jurisdiction which cannot be cured by acquiescence. It may also be mentioned that the decision in Ex. p.