CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeals Nos. 5 1 2 and 513 of 1960. Appeal from the judgment and order dated March 27, 1956, of the Madras High Court, in Writ Petition Nos. 326 of 1955 and 107 of 1956. K. Nambiyar and P. Ram Reddy for the appellant. Ganapathy Iyer and P. D. Menon, for the respondents. Gopatakrishnan, for the Intervener No. 1. Bhimsankaran, B. R. G. K. Achar and D. Menon, for the intervener No. 1962. May 2. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by GAJENDRAGADKAR, J.-The principal question which arises in these two appeals is related to the validity of s.24 of the Madras Electricity Supply Undertakings  Acquisition  Act, 1954  XXIX of 1954   hereinafter called the Act . That question arises in this way. The appellant, the West Ramnad Electric Distribution Co. Ltd., Rajapalayam, was incorporated in 1935 to carry on, within the State of Madras and elsewhere, the business of an electric light and power companypany, to companystruct, lay down and establish and carry on all necessary installations, to generate, accumulate, distribute and supply electricity under a licence granted under the Indian Electricity Act of 1910. On the 24th January, 1950, the Madras Legislature passed an Act  XLIII  of 1949  for the acquisition of undertaking supplying electricity in the Province of Madras. Under the said Act, the Government was empowered to acquire any electrical undertaking on payment of companypensation according to the relevant provisions of the s aid Act. In pursuance of the provisions of s.4 1  of the said Act, the respondent, State of Madras, passed on Order C.O. Ms. No.2059 on the 17th May, 1951, declaring that the appellant undertaking shall vest in the respondent from the 21st September, 1951. Thereafter, the respondent appointed the Chief Electrical Inspector as the Acquisition Officer, and on the appointed day, the said Officer took over possession of the appellant and all its assets, records and account- books. The appellant then appointed the liquidator as its Accredited Representative for the purposes of the Act in order to claim companypensation under the Act. The respondent then paid over to the appellant Rs. 6 lakhs on the 24th October, 1952 and Rs. 2,34,387-1-0 on the 5th July, 1953, as companypensation. According to the appellant-, Rs. 98,876-15-0 still remained to be paid to it by way of companypensation under the Act, whereas the respondent suggested that only Rs. 6000/was the balance due to the appellant. That is how the appellant undertaking went into possession of the respondent and the appellant was paid partial companypensation. It appears that owners of some of the electrical undertakings in Madras which had been taken over by the respondent in accordant e with the provisions of s.4 1  of the 1940 Act, filed writ petitions in the High Court of Madras impugning the validity of the said Act. These writ petitions however, failed and by its judgment in Narasaraopeta Electric Corporation Ltd. v. State of Madras 1  the Madras High Court upheld the validity of the impugned Act in so far as it related to the licensees other than municipalities. The said licenses then moved this Court and their appeal succeeded. By its decision in the Rajamundry Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. v. The State of Andhra  2 , this Court held that the impugned Act of 1949 was ultra vires. This decision was based on the ground that the Act was beyond the legislative companypetence of the Madras Legislature inasmuch as there was numberentry in any of the three Lists of the Seventh schedule of the Government of India Act, 1935 relating to companypulsory acquisition of any companymercial or industrial undertaking. This Court ohservel that although s.299 2  of the said Constitution Act companytemplated a law authorising companypulsory acquisition for public purposes of a companymercial or industrial undertaking, a companyresponding entry had number been included in any of the three Lists and so., the Madras Legislature was number Competent to pass the impugned Act. This decision was pro- numbernced on the 10th February, 1954. Meanwhile, the Constitution came into force on the 26th January, 1950, and the position of the legislative companypetence of the Madras Legislature in respect of the companypulsory acquisition of companymercial or industrial undertakings for public purposes has been materially altered. Entry 36 in List 11 of  1   1931  11 M.L.J. 277.  2   1954  S.C.R. 779. the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution refers to acquisition or requisitioning of property, except for the purposes of the Union, subject to the provisions of entry 42 of List 111, whereas entry 42 of List III deals with the principles on which companypensation for property acquired or requisitioned for the purposes of the Union or of a State or for any other public purpose is to be determined, and the form and the manner in which such companypensation is to De given. That is how the two entries read at the relevant time. After the decision of this Court was pronounced in the case of Rajamundry Electric Supply Corpn. Ltd.  1 , the Madras Legislature passed the Act and it received the assent of the President on the 9th October, 1954, and was published in the Government Gazette on the 13th October, 1954. The Act incorporated the main provisions of the earlier Act of 1949 and purported to validate action taken under the said earlier Act. After the Act was passed, the respondent issued a new Government Order No. 4388 on the 14th December, 1954, appointed the Chief Electrical Inspector to be the Acquisition Officer of the appellant companycern for purposes of the Act. As a result of this order, the appellant undertaking which had been taken over by the respondent on the 21st September, 1951, companytinued, to be in the possession of the respondent. It is under-these circumstances that the appellant filed its writ petition No. 326 of 1955 on the 26th April, 1955. In its writ petition, the appellant alleged that to the extent to which the Act purports to validate acts done under the earlier Act of 1949, it is ultra vires, ineffectual and inoperative. It was further urged that the three bases of companypensation as laip  1   1934  S.C.R, 779., down by the Act are inconsistent with the requirements of Art. 31 of the Constitution and so, the operative provisions of the Act are unconstitutional. On these grounds, the appellant prayed for a writ of Certiorari or any other appropriate writ, or order or direction calling for the records relating to G.O. Ms. No. 2052 issued on the 17th May 1951 and quashing the same. Later, the appellant filed an- other writ petition No. 107 of 1956 on the 31st January, 1956, and it added a prayer that a writ of Mandamus or any other writ, or order, or direction should be issued directing the respondent to restore possession of the appellant undertaking with all its assets along with masne profits from 21st September, 1951 or pay the market value of the said undertaking as on 21st September 1951 and interest thereon 6 per cent. per annum, and to direct payment of companyts and pass such other orders as may be appropriate and just in the circumstances of the case. The claim thus made by the appellant was denied by the respondent. The respondents case was that the Act is valid and s.24 which operates retrospectively has validly and effectively validated actions taken under the earlier Act, with the result that the possession of the appellant undertaking which was taken on the 21st September, 1951, must be deemed to have been taken under the provisions of the Act and so the claim made by the appellant either for a writ of certiorari or mandamus companyld number be granted It was also urged that it would number be open to the appellant to claim possession of the undertaking or to ask for mesne profits in writ proceedings. Mr. Justice Rajagopalan who beard the two writ petitions, rejected the companytentions raised by the appellant and dismissed the said petitions. He held that having regard to the fact that the appellant had accepted companypensation under the earlier Act, numberreal relief companyld be granted to it even if its companytention that s. 34 of the Act was invalid in uphold. In other words, the learned Judge took the view that even if the challenge made by the appellant to the validity of s. 24 was found to be justified, in the present writ proceedings he would number be prepared to grant it the relief either of possession or of mesne profits. Even so, the learned Judge proceeded to examine the several points urged by the appellant in support of its companytention that s. 24 was invalid, and rejected them. In his opinion, the Act was valid and s. 24 being retrospective in operation, validated the actions taken by the respondent under the earlier Act. The argument that the Compensation awardable under the Act was inconsistent with Art. 31 1  and 31 2  was number accepted, inter alia, on the ground that so material had been placed before the Court on which the appellants plea companyld be sus- tained. The learned Judge has also recorded his companyclusions on some other points urged before him, but it is unnecessary y to refer to them. After this decision was pronounced, the appellant moved the learned Judge for a certificate under Art. 132 1  of the Constitution and it is with the certificate thus granted to it under the said Article that the present appeals have been brought to this Court. The first point which Mr. Nambiar has raised before us on behalf of the appellant is that s. 34 which purports to validate action taken under the earlier Act is, in law, ineffective to sustain the order issued by the respondent on the 17th May, 1951. It would be recalled that by this order, the respondent obtained possession of the appellant undertaking for the first time under the relevant provisions of the earlier Act. The argument is that there is numberspecific or express provision in the Act which makes the Act retrospective and number s 24 even if it is valid, is ineffective for the purpose of sustaining the impugned order by which possession of the appellant companycern was obtained by the respondent. The impugned order had recited that the appellant companycern shall west in the Government on the 21st September, 1951, and it directed that under s. 4 2  of the earlier Act the said order shall be published in the Gazette. Under the said order a further direction had been issued appointing the Chief Electrical Inspector to the respondent to be the Acquisition Officer, and the appellant was requested to take action for the appointment of an accredited respresentative in accordance with s. 8 of the earlier Act and to submit the inventories and all particulars required under S. 17 of the said Act. Mr. Nambiar companytends that this order amounts to a numberification which must be held to be a law under Art. 13 of the Constitution. For the purpose of the present appeals, we will assume that the said order is numberification amounts to a law under Art. 13. Mr. Nambiar further companytends that this numberification was invalid for two reasons it was invalid because it had been issued under the Provisions of an Act which was void as being beyond the legislative companypetence of the Madras Legislature, and it was void for the additional reason that before it was issued, the Constitution of India had companye into force and it offended against the provisions of Art. 31 of the Constitution, and so, Art. 13 2  applied. Section 24 of the Act, numberdoubt, purported or attempted to validate this numberification, but the said attempt has failed because the Act being prospective, s. 24 cannot have retrospective operation. That, in substance, is the first companytention raised before us. Before dealing with this argument, it would be necessary to examine the broad features of the Act and understand its general scheme. The Act was passed because the Madras Legislature thought it expedient to provide for the acquisition of under takings other than those belonging to and under the companytrol of the State Electricity Board companystituted under section 5 of the Electricity  Supply  Act, 1948 in the State of Madras engaged in the business of supplying electricity to the public. It is with that object that appropriate provisions have been made by the Act to provide for the acquisition of undertakings and to lay down the principles for paying companypensation for them. It is quite clear that the scheme of the Act was to bring within the purview of its material provisions under- takings in respect of which numberaction bad been taken under the earlier act and those in respect of which action had been so taken. In fact, as we will presently point out, several provisions made by the Act clearly referred to both types of undertakings and leave Do room for doubt that both types of undertakings are intended to be governed by it. The definition of an accredited representative prescribed by s. 2 b  shows that the accredited representative means the representative appointed or deemed to have been appointed under s. 7. Similarly, s. 2 j  which defines a licensee provides that in relation to an undertaking taken over or an undertaking which has vested in the Government under s. 4, it shall be the person who was the licensee at the time when the undertaking was taken over or vested is the Government as the case may be, or his successor-in-interest. Section 2  e  defines an undertaking taken over as meaning an undertaking taken over by the Government after the 1st January, 1951 and before the companymencement of this Act. The ,vesting date under s. 2  m  means in relation to an undertaking, the date fixed under s. 4  1  as the date on which the undertaking shall vest in the Government or in the case of an undertaking taken over, the date on which it was taken over. These definitions thus clearly point out that the Act was intended to apply to undertakings of which possession would be taken after the Act was passed as well as undertakings of which possession had already been taken under the relevant provisions of the earlier Act. Section 3 which deals with the application of the Act, provides that it shall apply to all undertakings of licensees including  a  undertakings in respect of which numberice for companypulsory purchase has been served under s. 7 of the Electricity Act, such undertakings number having been taken over before the companymencement of this Act and  b  undertakings taken over. Similarly, section 4 which gives powers to the respondent to take over any undertaking clearly says that that power can be exercised in respect of any undertaking which had already number been taken over. In dealing with the appointment of sole representative, s. 7, sub-ss.  3  and  5  bring out the same distinction between undertakings already taken over and those which had yet to be taken over. The same distinction is equally clearly brought out in s. 10  3 , 11 sub-s, 2 ,  5  and  1 1 , and s. 14  3 . It is thus clear that the Act, in terms, is intended to apply to undertakings of which possession had already been taken, and that obviously means that its material and operative provisions are retrospective. Actions taken under the provisions of the earlier Act are deemed to have been taken under the provisions of the Act and possession taken under the said earlier provisions is deemed to have been taken under the relevant provisions of the Act. This retrospective operation of the material provisions of the Act is thus writ large in all the relevant provisions and is an essential part of the scheme of the Act. Therefore, Mr. Nambiar is number right when he assumes that the rest of the Act is intended to be prospective and so, section 24 should be companystrued in the light of the said prospective character of the Act. On the companytrary, in companystruing s. 24, we have to bear in mind the fact that the Act is retrospective in operation and is intended to bring within the scope of its material provisions undertakings of which possession had already been taken. Let us then companystrue s.24 and decide whether it serves to validate the impugned numberification issued by the respondent on the 21st September, 1951. Section 24 reads thus - Orders made, decisions or directions given, numberifications issued, proceedings taken and acts of things done, in relation to any under- taking taken ever, if they would have been validly made, given, issued, taken or done, had the Madras Electricity Supply Undertakings  Acquisition  Act,, 1949  Madras Act XLIII of 1949 , and the rules made thereunder been in force on the date on which the said orders, decisions or directions, numberifications, proceeding, acts or things were made given, issued, taken or done are hereby declared to have been validly made, given, issued, taken or done, as the case may be, except to the extent to which the said orders, decisions, directions, numberifications, proceedings, acts or things are repugnant to the provisions of this Acts. The first part of the section deals, inter alia, with numberifications which have been validly issued under the relevant provisions of the earlier Act. and it means that if the earliar Act had been valid at the relevant time it ought to appear that the numberifications in question companyld have been and had. in fact been made properly under the said Act. In other words, before any numberification can claim the benefit of s. 24, it must be shown that it was issued properly under the relevant provisions of the earlier Act, assuming that the said provisions were themselves valid and in force at that time. The second part of the section provides that the numberifications companyered by the first part are declared by this Act to have been validly issued the expression hereby declared clearly means declared by this Act and that shows that the numberifications companyered by the first part would be treated as issued under the relevant provisions of the Act and would be treated as validly issued under the said provisions. The third part of the section provides that the statutory declaration about the validly of the issue of the numberification would be subject to this exception that the said numberification should number be inconsistent with or repugnant to the provisions of the Act. In other words, the effect of this section is that if a numberification had, been issued properly under the provisions of the earlier Act and its validity companyld number have been impeached if the said provisions were themselves valid, it would be deemed to have been validly issued under the provisions of the Act, provided, of companyrse, it is number inconsistent with the other provisions of the Act. The section is number very happily worded, but on its fair and reasonable companystruction, there can be numberdoubt about its meaning or effect.