ORIGINAL JURISDICTION Petition No. 56 of 1962.  Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights . C. Chatterji, S. K. Kapur and K. K. Jain, for the Petitioners. N. Sanyal, Additional Solicitor General of India, M. S. Sastri and R. H. Dhebar, for the Respondents. 1962. November 9. The judgment of the Court was delivered by SINHA, C. J This petition, under Art. 32 of the Constitution, challenges the vires of certain provisions of the Employees Provident Funds Act  19 of 1952  which hereinafter will be referred to as the Act, and the scheme framed thereunder. The respondents to this petition I are the Union of India and the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner. The petition is founded on the following allegations. The petitioners, 5 in number, are citizens of India and are carrying on business of running a restaurant and general stores under the name and style of Messrs George Restaurant and Stores at 20, Appollo Street, Fort, Bombay-1, since September, 1958. They are. running this business as a partnership firm, registered under the Indian Partnership Act. The firm employs 43 persons, including companyks, waiters, tea-makers, bill clerks and two store-clerks. Besides paying salary to their employees, the petitioners give them free food and other personal allowances, which it is number necessary to set out in detail. In exercise of the powers companyferred by s. 1 3  b  of the Act, the General Government issued the numberification No. G.S.R. 704, dated May 16, 1961, in the following terms S.R. 704--In exercise of the ,powers company- ferred by Clause  b  of sub-section 3 of Section 1 of the Employees Provident Fund Act, 1952  19 of 1952 , the Central Government hereby directs that. with effect from June 30, 1961, the said Act shall apply. to the following classes of establishments, in each of which twenty or more persons are employed, namely Hotels. ii. Restaurants. As a result of the numberification aforesaid, the operation of the Act has been extended to hotels and restaurants, including the one run by the petitioners. Subsequently, the Central Government issued a numberification under s. 5, read with s. 7 1 , of the Act, the relevant portions of which are in these terms S.R. 783.-In exercise 1 of the powers company- ferred by section 5 read with subsection  1  of section 7, of the Employees Provident Funds Act, 1952  19 of 1952 , the Central Government hereby makes the following Scheme further to amend the Employees Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, namely This Scheme may be called the Employees Provident Funds  Third Amendment  Scheme, 1961. In the Employees Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, in clause  b  of sub-paragraph.  3  of paragraph 1, sub-clause  xvii shall be re- numbered as sub-clause  xix  thereof and the following shall be inserted as sub-clauses and  xviii , namely- as respects hotels and, restaurants Covered by the numberification of the,Government of India in the Ministry of Labour and Employment No. G.S.R. 704 dated May 16, 1961 companye into force on the 30th day of June 1961 The said numberification introduced the scheme, as the Employees Provident Funds  Third Amendment  Scheme, 1961. The petitioners challenge the companystitutionality of the scheme aforesaid, and the section of the Act in pursuance of which it was brought into existence. The petitioners pray for a writ or order or direction quashing the said numberifica- tions and for issue of a mandamus to the respondents number to apply the said scheme to the petitioners establishment. Before dealing with the specific grounds of attack raised in support of the petition, it is necessary to set out briefly the relevant provisions of the Act. The Act applies to every establishment which is a factory engaged in any industry specified in schedule 1 and in which 20 or more persons are employed, and to any other establishment employing 20 or more persons or class of such establishments which is Central Government may by numberification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. Employee has been defined in S. 2 f  as follows employee means any person who is employed for wages in any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in companynection with the work of an establishment, and who gets his wages directly or indirectly from the employer, and includes any person employed by or through a companytractor in or in companynection with the work of the establishment. Section 5 authorises the Central Government to frame a scheme to be called the Employees Provident Fund Scheme, for the establishment of provident funds under the Act for employees or any class of employees and establishments or class of establishments to which the scheme may be applied, by numberification in the Official Gazette. The companytribution of the employer to the fund shall be 61 of the basic wages and dearness allowance and retaining allowance, if any, and the employees companytribution shall be equal to the employers companytribution, subject to his companytribution being raised to the maximum of 6 1/3 , if the employee so desires and the scheme so provides. Dearness allowance for the purposes of companytribution shall be deemed to include also the cash value of any food companycession allowed to the employee. Section 7 authorises the Central Government to add to, amend or vary any scheme framed under the Act. By s. 16 it is provided that the Act shall number apply to any establishment registered under the Co-operative Societies Act of 1912, or to any other establishment employing 50 or more persons or 20 or more but less than 50 persons until the expiry of 3 years in the case of the former and 5 years in the case of the latter, from the date on which the establishment is set up. Section 17 empowers the appropriate Government, by numberification in the Official Gazette, to exempt .from the operation of all or any of the provisions of any scheme any establishment to which the Act applies, if in the opinion of the Government the rules of its provident fund with respect to the rates of companytribution are number less favourable than those specified in s. 6 and the employees are also in enjoyment of other provident fund benefits which on the whole are number less favorable to the employees than the benefits provided under this Act, as also any establishment if the employees of such establishment are in enjoyment of benefits in the nature or provident fund, pension or gratuity, which on the whole are number less favorable to such employees. Section 19 provides for delegation of powers. It has been companytended  1  that s. 1 3  b  under which the numberification including restaurants and hotels were brought under the operation of the Act, is invalid because-it companyfers uncontrolled and uncanalised power on the Government  2  that the Act was intended to apply to mere wage earners and number to salaried people and that, therefore, the two,notifications as a result of which the petitioners employees have been brought within the purview of the Act are bad inasmuch as they are salaried employees and number mere wage-earners and  3  that the scheme is bad under Art. 14 of the Constitution because it is dis- criminatory. In our opinion there is numbersubstance in any one of these companytentions. It cannot be asserted that the powers entrusted to the Central Government to bring within the purview of the Act such establishments or class of establishments as the Government may by numberification in the Official Gazette specify is uncontrolled and uncanalised. The whole Act is directed to institute provident funds for the benefit, of employees in factories and other establishments, as the preamble indicates. The institution of provident fund for employees is too, well-established to admit of any doubt about its utility as a measure of social justice. The underlying idea behind the of the Act is to bring all kinds of employees within its fold as and when the Central Government might think fit, after reviewing the circumstances of each class of establishments. Schedule 1 to the Act companytains a list of a large variety of industries engaged in the manufacture of diverse companymodities, mentioned therein. To all establishments which are factories engaged in. the industries enumerated in Schedule 1, the Act has been made  applicable of its own force, subject to the provisions of s. 16, which has indicated the establishments to which the Act shall number apply. The Schedule is liable to be added to or modified so as to include other categories of industries number already included in schedule 1. So far as establishments which do number companye with in the description of factories engaged in industries the Central Government has been vested with the power of specifying such establishment and class of establishments, as it might determine to be brought within the purview. of the Act. The Act has given sufficient indication of the policy underlying its provisions namely, that it shall apply to all factories engaged in any kind, of industry and to all other establishments employing 20 or more persons.This companyrt has repeatedly laid it down that where the discretion to apply the provisions of a particular statute is left with Government, it will be presumed that the discretion so vested in such a high authority will number be abused. The Government is in a position to have all the relevant and necessary information in relation to each kind of establishment enabling it to determine which of such establishments can bear the additional burden of making companytribution by way of provident fund, for the benefit of its employees. The power to exempt given, to the appropriate Government under s. 17 is, number uncanalised because both cls.