CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeals Nos. 531 and 532 of 1961. Appeals from the judgment and decree dated January 31, 1957, of the Madras High Court in Appeal Suit No. 357/1951. Satyanarayana, for the appellant  in C.A.No.531/1961 and respondents Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7 and 10 to 12  in.C.A.No.532/61 . V. Viswanatha Sastri. and T.V.R. Tatachar for the appellants  in C.A. No. 532/1961 . K. Daphtary, Attorney-General, R. Ganapathy Iyer and R.N. Sachthey, for the respondent  in C.A. No. 531/1961  and Respondent No. 2  in C.A. No.532/1961 . October 31, 1963. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by AYYANGAR J.-These two appeals arise out of a single judgment of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh and are filed by two distinct parties who felt aggrieved by it, pursuant to the grant of certificates of fitness granted by the High Court under Art. 133 1  of the Constitution. In Dwaraka Tirumalai--a village in the West Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh, there is a temple dedicated to Sri Venkateswaraswami. The administration of the affairs of this temple was being companyducted under a scheme settled on the 28th August, 1930 by the Subordinate Judge of Eluru in Original Suit No. 1 of 1925 on his file. That was a suit filed by certain worshippers of the temple under s. 92 of the Civil Procedure Code for the settling of a scheme for the proper management and administration of the institution. The hereditary trustees of the temple as well as the office holders thereof, and in particular the archakas and the Karnam were party-defendants to that litigation. There had, even then, been companytroversy as regards the rights of the two office holders whom we have named and as regards the items of remuneration to which they were entitled and these were companysidered and findings recorded by the Court and the provisions of the scheme framed embodied the findings on these points. From the decision of the learned Subordinate Judge appeals were filed to the High Court both by the worshipper plaintiffs as well as by the Dharmakartas who were members of the family of the Zamindar of Mylavaram which was the hereditary trustee of the temple-but both the appeals were dismissed and the scheme, as framed by the trial Judge, was companyfirmed. During the pendency of this suit in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, the Madras Legislature enacted the Madras Hindu Religious Endowments Act  Madras Act 11 of 1927  which we will hereafter refer to, as the Act. It was an enactment to provide. as its preamble recited, for the better administration and governance of certain Hindu Religious Endowments. The temple of Venkateswaraswami was an institution to which the Act applied and according to the numberenclature adopted by the Act the temple in question was an excepted templean expression which was defined as meaning a temple, the right of succession to the office of trustee whereof has been hereditary. As already stated, the family of the Zamindars of Mylavaram were the hereditary trustees of this temple. Section 75 of the Act ran Where the administration of a religious endowment is governed by any scheme settled under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, such scheme shall, numberwithstanding any provisions of this Act which may be inconsistent with the provisions of such scheme, be deemed to be a scheme settled under this Act, and such scheme may be modified or cancelled in the manner provided by this Act. The scheme framed by the Subordinate Judge and companyfirmed by the High Court thus being a scheme which was deemed to be a scheme settled under the Act, the provisions of s. 57 9  were attracted and this sub-section ran 57.  9  Any scheme of administration settled by a companyrt under this section or which under section 75 is deemed to be a scheme settled under this Act may, at any time for sufficient cause, be modified or cancelled by the companyrt on an 1 SCI/64-18 application made by the Board or the trustee or any person having interest, but number otherwise. In accordance with the powers companytained in that behalf the Board of Commissioners for Hindu Religious Endowments  for shortness the Board  who were the authorities companystituted to administer the Act filed an original petition on August 3, 1947O.P. 76 of 1947 in the Court of the District Judge, West Godavari for the modification of the scheme. The points upon which the modifications were sought were numerous and several of these were accepted by the Court but only two of them are number in companytroversy and are the subject- matter of the appeals and these relate to the remuneration allowable to two classes of temple officials Archakas, and  b  the Karnam, both of these holding their office by hereditary right. The learned District Judge accepted the companytention raised by these two sets of officeholders that numbercase had been made out for varying the remuneration which had been held payable to them under the original scheme in O.S. 1 of 1925. Against this decision of the District Judge an appeal was filed to the High Court by the Board of Commissioners and the learned Judges allowed the appeal in part and substantially modified the provisions as to the remuneration payable to the two officeholders. It is only necessary to add that the archaka respondents filed a memorandum of cross objections to the appeal preferred by the Board, but this was dismissed. That dismissal has number become final and the claims made in that memorandum cannot be and are number the subject of challenge before us. Questioning the companyrectness of the judgment of the High Court in the appeal by the Board both the archakas as well as the Karnam filed petitions for certificates of fitness under Art. 133 and these having been granted, their appeals are number before us. Civil Appeal No. 531 of 1961 is the appeal filed by the hereditary Karnam of the suit-temple, while Civil Appeal 532 of 1961 is by the Archakas. Civil Appeal No. 532 of 1961 We shall, first, take up for companysideration Civil Appeal 532 of 1961. which is companycerned with the grievance of the archakas against the variation made by the High Court against the scheme as settled by the learned District Judge. According to the appellants, they are entitled to several items of remuneration. The major one among these is a half share in the votive offerings in the shape of cash etc. deposited by the worshippers in the Hudni or dibble kept in the temple to which they claimed title by virtue of long usage and custom. It was said that the total companylections from the dibbi amounted to near Rs. 50,000 per year. The manner in which the dibbi companylections were gathered, accounted for and divided is set out in the judgment in S.1 of 1925 and from its companytents it is manifest that this usage had been recognised by several previous decisions in litigations to which the temple was a party. We might, here, mention a matter which is of relevance only to Civil Appeal 531 of 1961 and that is that from the half share to which the temple was entitled the Karnam of the temple was by custom given for his services a one anna or a 1/16th share. As regards these the learned Subordinate Judge in his judgment in O.S. 1 of 1925 observed The archakas and the Karnam of the temple were allowed to take their respective shares in the companylections in dibbi for a long time and though the origin of such a right is number known, it cannot be said that it had numberlegal origin. It might have been recognised by the founder him--elf, of the temple. Besides a share in the dibbi companylections the archakas also laid a claim to a share in the bhogam and besides, certain fees on the occasion of marriages or Upanayanams performed in the temple. monies dropped on the plate on the occasion of Dweeparadhana and certain claims to Padaraksha Kanukalu and certain pumpkins which were brought to the temple as offerings to the deity. It was their claim that their right to these items of extra remuneration was founded on custom and had been recognised and given effect to from time immemorial by Courts on occasions when their right to any of these items was disputed. The learned Subordinate Judge who framed the scheme in O.S. 1 of 1925 did number specifically set out these minor items in the scheme that he framed, though some of these matters were the subject of discussion and finding in the judgment to which the scheme was a schedule but in line with the terms of s. 79 of the Act which, by the date his judgment was pronounced, had companye into force and which read Save as otherwise expressly provided in or under this Act numberhing herein companytained shall affect any established usage of a math or temple or the rights, honours, emoluments and perquisites to which any person may by custom or otherwise be entitled in such math or temple. added in paragraph 23 of the scheme these words Nothing companytained in the scheme shall affect established usage with regard to the rights, honours, emoluments and perquisites to which any person may by custom or otherwise be entitled in the temple. There was, however, a specific reference in the scheme in cl. 12 for the division of the dibbi companylections and the handing over to the archakas of the half share to which they were entitled. It was of the terms of this scheme that modifications were sought by the petition filed under s. 57 9  of the Act. The petition while companyceding, in paragraph 4 e , the right of the archakas to the half share in the dibbi companylections, proceeded to state in paragraph 7 g , 7.  g  The archakas claim a half share in the dibbi companylections such half share exceeds Rs. 18,000 per year in spite of this the archakas claim further moneys. As payment of such a claim is against the interests of the temple, provision has to be made that the archakas are number entitled to any remuneration or fee or share or in the shape of lands or income from the lands, other than their share in the dibbi companylection. and in sub-paragraph 7.  b  The practice of giving a share of the bogums to certain temple servants is against the interests of the temple. The modification thus sought was objected to by the archakas who were impleaded as respondents to the petition and they averred in paragraphs 11 and 12 that their right to the bogums and the other fees and perquisites which they were claiming and which were being received and enjoyed by them up to then, were rightfully theirs and that there was numberreason, in law or equity, to deprive them of these items. The learned District Judge, after accepting several suggestions made by the Board for the modification of the scheme in the matter of the manner in which the dibbi accounts were to. be kept, how the dibbi was to be opened etc. which. are numberlonger the subject of companyplaint. observed as follows in regard to the archakas and the Karnam with whom we are companycerned So far as the archakas, and the karnam are companycerned most of their rights are governed by the decrees, usage, custom, etc., and they should be adhered to For doing these definite duties irrespective of the question whether the worshipper visits the temple or number, they are paid their share in the dibbi companylections The person incharge of the deity at the time of the worship will be the archakas or archakas attached to the temple They may be required to perform special worship or companyduct other ceremonies according to usage and custom and be paid accordingly. It is unnecessary and it will be dangerous to disturb the established usage in the temple or to create misunderstandings which will detrimentally affect the worshipping public and the smooth working of the institution intended primarily for the propitiating of God by the worshippers who go there seeking temporal and spiritual advantages. So far as the other offerings by the donors to the temple of the deity are companycerned which are number put in the dibbi the archakas or others can lay numberclaim The archakas have got certain rights in the prasadams. There is numberreason why that right should be companymuted. These things have to be left to the good sense of the archakas and sthanikar According to P.W.1, the quantities to be supplied for each bhogum are fixed. These things should number be changed as numbertrouble has been experienced with regard to it.  Italics ours . Thus in effect the learned District Judge, though he made substantial modifications in the details of the administration, refused to disturb the mode or quantum of remuneration which had previously prevailed in the temple. It was from this judgment that the Board preferred an appeal to the High Court. The learned Judges of the High Court modified the direction of the learned District Judge by stating The appellant seeks also the modification of clause  14  of the scheme in so far as it provides that the archakas shall be entitled to claim as and for their remuneration only half the share of the income from the dibbi installed in the temple and such other emoluments, perquisites etc., allowed under the decrees of Courts, or usage.