CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 14 of 1963. From the judgment and decree dated July 30, 1962, of the Rajasthan High Court in Civil Regular S. A. No. 223 of 1961. C. Setalvad, S. T. Desai and Naunit Lal for the appellant. S. Pathak and S. N. Andley, for the respondent. 1963. March 4. The judgment of the companyrt was delivered by GAJENDRAGADKAR J.-It is number necessary to deal with the merits of the points which the appellant wanted to raise before us in this appeal because we are satisfied that the respondents prayer that the special leave granted to the appellant should be revoked, is well-founded. The appellant is a tenant of the premises in suit which are owned by the respondent. These premises were let out to the appellant by the respondent under a rent-note executed on December 8, 1953. The appellant was permitted to use the said premises for his Oil Mill. The terms of the lease provided that the appellant was to pay to the respondent the agreed rent every month and in case of default for three months, the respondent was entitled to evict the appellant before the expiry of the stipulated period which was five years, and in that case he was entitled also to claim the rent for the remaining period. On May 2, 1959, the respondent sued the appellant for ejectment in the Court of Munsif, East Jaipur City. He alleged that he had received the rent from the appellant up to October 31, 1957 and that thereafter the appellant had defaulted in the payment of rent in spite of repeated demands, and that even at the date of the suit he was in arrears of rent and had failed to pay the house tax according to the agreement. His case was that the appellants tenancy had expired on December 1, 1958 by efflux of time, but the appellant nevertheless failed to deliver over possession of the premises to the respondent. He, however, purported to deposit a lump sum of Rs. 1053/- to companyer the period from November 1, 1957 to November 30, 1958 which was due from him. The respondent pleaded that the appellant had companymitted more than three defaults in the payment of rent of two months each during the period of 18 months and that even -at the date of the suit, the rent or mesne profits for 5 months and 2 days still remained to be paid. That is the basis on which a decree for ejectment was claimed by the respondent against the appellant. The appellant denied the respondents claim and alleged that the respondent was number entitled to claim ejectment against him by virtue of the provisions of section 13 1  a  of the Rajasthan Premises  Control of Rent arid Eviction  Act, 1950  Act XVII of 1950   hereinafter called the Act . He also pleaded that by virtue of the fact that the respondent had accepted rent paid by the appellant, he had waived his right to evict him. In other words, he denied that there was any default, and resisted the respondents prayer for his ejectment. At the date of the first hearing of the suit in the trial Court, the appellant deposited Rs. 648/- on account of rent due up to the said date and the said payment was accepted by the respondent without prejudice. On these pleadings, the learned trial judge framed four issues, the principal issue being whether the appellant had companymitted three defaults of two months within the period of 18 months in the payment of rent ? The finding of the trial Court on the said issue as well as on the other issues framed by it was in favour of the appellant. In the result, the respondents suit was dismissed. The respondent then preferred an appeal in the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge, Jaipur City. The appellate Court held that on the facts proved by the respondent, the three defaults had been companymitted by the appellant, and so, he was entitled to a decree for ejectment. On these findings, the decree passed by the trial Court was set aside and the respondents claim for ejectment was allowed. The appellant challenged this decision by preferring a second appeal before the Rajasthan High Court. This appeal was heard by a learned single judge of the said High Court and was dismissed. The appellants request for leave to prefer an appeal under Letters Patent was rejected by the learned Judge. It is against the decision of the learned single judge in second appeal that the appellant applied for and obtained special leave to appeal to this Court.