CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Criminal Appeal No. 107 of 1965. Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order, dated June 22, 1965 of the Bombay High Court in Criminal Applica- tion No. 613 of 1965. Niren De, Additional Solicitor-General and B. R. G. K. Achar, for the appellant. K. Garg, D. P. Singh, M. K. Ramamurthi and S. C. Agar- wala for respondent No. 1. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Subba Rao J. Prabbakar Pandurang Sanzgiri, who has been detained by the Government of Maharashtra under S. 30 1  b  of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, in the Bombay District Prison in order to prevent him from acting in a manner pre- judicial to the defence of India, public safety and maintenance of public order, has written, with the permission of the said Government, a book in Marathi under the title Anucha Antarangaat  Inside the Atom . The learned Judges of the High Court, who had gone through the table of companytents of the book. expressed their opinion on the book thus we are satisfied that the manuscript book deals with the theory of elementary particles in -in objective way. The manuscript does number purport to be a research work but it purports to be a book written with a view to educate the people and disseminate knowledge regarding quantum theory. The book is, therefore, purely of scientific interest and it cannot possibly cause any prejudice to the defence of India, public safety or maintenance of public order. In September, 1964, the detenu applied to the Government of Maharashtra seeking permission to send the manuscript out of the jail for publication but the Government by its letter, dated March 27, 1965, rejected the request. He again applied to the Superintendent, Arthur Road Prison, for permission to send the manuscript out and that too was rejected. Thereafter, he filed a petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Maharashtra at Bombay for directing the State of Maharashtra to permit him to send out the manuscript of the book written by him for its eventual publication. The Government of Maharashtra in the companynter-affidavit did number allege that the publication of the said book would be prejudicial to the objects of the Defence of India Act, but averred that the Government was number required by law to permit the detenu to publish books while in detention. The High Court of Bombay held that the civil rights and liberties of a citizen were in numberway curbed by the order of detention and that it was always open to the detenu to carry on his activities within the companyditions governing his detention. It further held that there were numberrules prohibiting a detenu from sending a book outside the jail with a view to get it published. In that view the High Court directed the Government to allow the manuscript book to be sent by the detenu to his wife for its eventual publication. The State of Maharashtra has preferred the present appeal against the said order of the High Court. The companytentions of the learned Additional Solicitor General may be briefly stated thus When a person is detained he loses his freedom he is numberlonger a free man and, therefore, he can exercise only such privileges as are companyferred on him by the order of detention. The Bombay Conditions of Detention Order, 1951. which regulates the terms of the first respondents detention, does number companyfer on him any privilege or right to write a book and send it out of the prison for publication. In support of his companytention he relies upon the observations of Das, J., as he then was, in A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras 1  wherein the learned Judge has expressed the view, in the companytext of fundamental rights, that if a citizen loses the freedom of his person by reason of a lawful detention, he cannot claim the rights under Art. 19 of the Constitution as the rights enshrined in the said article are only the attributes of a free man. Mr. Garg, learned companynsel for the detenu, raised before us the following two points  1  a restriction of the nature imposed by the Government on the detenu can only be made by an order issued by the appropriate Government under cls.  f  and  h  of sub-r.  1  of r. 30 of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, hereinafter called the Rules, and that too in strict companypliance with s. 44 of the Defence of India Act, 1962, hereinafter called the Act, and that as the impugned restriction was neither made by such an order number did it companyply with s. 44 of the Act, it was an illegal restriction on his personal liberty and  2  neither the detention order number the  1  1950 S.C.R. 88, 291. companyditions of detention which governed the first respondents detention enabled the Government to prevent the said respondent from sending his manuscript book out of the prison for publication and, therefore, the order of the Government rejecting the said respondents request in that regard was illegal. Article 358 of the Constitution suspends the provisions of Art. 19 of Part III of the Constitution during the period the proclamation of emergency is in operation and the order passed by the President under Art. 3 5 9 suspended the enforcement, inter alia, of Art. 21 during the period of the said emergency. But the Presidents order was a companyditional one. In effect it said that the right to move the High Court or the Supreme Court remained suspended if such a person had been deprived of his personal liberty under the Defence of India Act, 1962, or any rule or order made thereunder. If a person was de lived of his personal liberty number under the Act or a rule or order made thereunder but in companytravention thereof, his right to move the said Courts in that regard would number be suspended. The question, therefore. in this case is whether the first respondents liberty has been restricted in terms of the Defence of India Rules whereunder he was detained. If it was in companytravention of the said Rules, he would have the right to approach the High Court under Art.