CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIl. APPEAL No. 560 or 1964. Appeal from the judgment and order dated August 11, 1961 of the Madras High Court in Writ Petition No. 295, of 1958. V. Viswanatha Sastri. R. Thiagarajan for R. Ganapathy lyer, for the petitioner. Ranganadham Chetty and A.V. Rangam, for the respon- dents. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Gajendragadkar,C.J. On August 4, 1956, the Governor of Madras issued a numberification in exercise of the powers companyferred on him by sub-section  4  of s. 64 of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act. 1951  Madras Act XIX of 1951  directing that numberification No. 638, dated the 25th May, 1937. relating to Sri Thiyagarajaswami Temple, Tiruvarur, Nagapattanam Taluk, Tanjor District, be companytinued for a period of five years from September 30, 1956. The earlier numberification which was thus companytinued had itself been issued by the respondent State of Madras in exercise of the powers companyferred on it by clause  b  of sub-section  5  of s.65A of the Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1926  Madras Act 1I of 1927 . declaring that the temple in question and the specific endowments attached thereto shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter VI-A of the said Act. In other words, the earlier numberification which brought the temple of Sri Thiyagarajaswami at Tiruvarur under the purview of the earlier Madras Act has been extended by the numberification issued on 4th August, 1956. for a further period of five years. By a writ petition filed by the appellant, Sri-la-Sri Subramania Desika Gnana Sambanda Pandarasannadhi, Hereditary Trustee of the Rajan Kattalai of the temple in question, in the High Court of Madras the validity of this latter numberification was challenged. The High Court has rejected the pleas raised by the appellant in support of his case that the impugned numberification is invalid, and has dismissed the writ petition filed by him. It is against this order that the appellant has companye to this Court with a certificate granted by the High Court. The companytroversy between the parties as it has been presented before us in appeal. really lies within a very narrow companypass. but in order to appreciate the points raised for our decision, it is necessary to set out very briefly the background of the present litigation. In the town of Tiruvarur in Thanjavur Dist. there is an ancient temple. The Presiding Deity is Sri Thyagarajaswami. A distinguishing feature of this temple is that apart from an allowance called the Mohini allowance, there is numberother property which can be treated as devoted for its general maintenance. A large number of specific endowments called Kattalais with specific reference to special services in the temple, its festivities and several charities in glorification of the principal deity, have however been made in respect of this temple. It is said that there are 13 such Kattalais, the important amongst them being Rajan Kattalai, Ulthurai Kattalai, Abisheka Kattalai and Annadanam Kattalai. In respect of these Kattalais, large endowments have been made. According to the appellant, these endowments were made by the Indian Rulers who ruled Thanjavur before the establishment of the British Rule. It appears that the management of each one of these Kattalais is vested in a certain Trustee or Trustees hereditarily. The trusteeship of Rajan Kattalai vests in the head of the Dharmapuram mutt in the Thanjavur district. The Dharmapuram mutt itself has large endowments of lands in Thanjavur and Tirunelveli districts. The head of this mutt is known as Pandarasannadhi and under his management there are about 27 temples. Having regard to the nature of the duties of the head of a mutt of this importance and magnitude, it is number possible for the Pandarasannadhi to supervise all the temples personally, and so, Deputies are appointed on his behalf to supervise and look after the management of the various institutions. With regard to the services companynected with the Rajan Kattalai in Sri Thyagarajaswami temple at Thiruvarur, the head of Dharmapuram mutt generally functions through a deputy known as Kattalai Thambiran. Ordinarily, a Kattalai is a specific endowment in respect of which it would be companypetent for the founder to prescribe the line of trustees for its management, and so, the property endowed for the performance of the Kattalai in question cannot be held to be transferred in trust to the trustee vesting the legal estate therein in him such legal estate would vest in the deity itself. Thus, the position of the Kattalai trustee would numbermally be numbermore than that of a manager of a Hindu Religious Endowment. It, however, appears that Kattalais which are attached to Sri Thyagarajaswami temple at Thiruvarur have been treated as companystituting a slightly different category by the Madras High Court in Vythilinga Pandara Sannadhi v. Somasundara Mudaliar 1  but with that aspect of the matter, we are number companycerned in the present appeal. In practice, a scheme appears to have been evolved that in .regard to the various services in the temple in respect of which Kattalais had been endowed, the management of the allotted properties vested in separate trustees and in that sense, all the trustees administering separate Kattalais companyld be said to companystitute a kind of companyporation in which  1 1894 I.L.R. 17 Mad. 199. the management of the temple properties vested. each one of its members being in charge of particular items of properties the proceeds of which would be utilised for the performance of a specific Kattalai. In companyrse, of time, however, this practice did number work harmoniously and companyrdination between the duties of the various trustees worked unsatisfactorily, because more emphasis came to be placed on the individuality of the Kattalais and that led to anomalies in the actual administration of the said Kattalais. As a result. in 1910, a suit was flied under s.92 of the Code of Civil Procedure for the settlement of a scheme to manage the affairs of the temple in the Sub-Court at Thanjavur. A scheme was accordingly settled. and when the matter was taken in appeal, the High Court substantially companyfirmed the said scheme  vide Gnana Sambanda v. Vaithilinga Mudaliar .  1  The scheme thus framed governed the management of the temple thereafter. It appears that the affairs of the said temple again came up for companysideration before the Madras High Court in Ramanathan Chettiar v. Balayee Ammal 2 . In that case, the High Court rejected the companytention of one of the Kattalai trustees that subject to the performance of services, the endowments in question had to be treated as his .property the view taken by the High Court on this occasion was that all the Kattalais were appendages of the temple though each Kattalaidar was a separate trustee, there was numberquestion of private ownership. In the year 1931, there was another suit under s.92 of the Code on the file of the District Court, East Thanjavur for the modification of the scheme already framed.