CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeals Nos. 96 to 98 of 1964. Appeals by special leave from the judgments and orders dated September 22, 1960, and December 6, 1960 of the Punjab High Court in Income-tax References Nos. 19 of 1958 and 6 of 1959 respectively. V. Gupte, Solicitor-General, R. Ganapathy Iyer and N. Sachthey, for the appellant. Deva Singh Randhawa and Harbans Singh, for the respondent. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Shah, J. On April 10, 1953 the estate of the joint Hindu family of which the respondent was a member was partitioned, and the respondent was allotted, besides other properties, 400shares of the Simbhaoli Sugar Mills Private Ltd., and was made liable to pay a business debt amounting to Rs. 3,91,875/- due by the family to R.B. Seth Jessa Ram Fateh Chand of Delhi. On April 14, 1953 the respondent executed a deed of trust in respect of 300 out of the shares of the Simbhaoli Sugar Mills which fell of to his share. The following are the material provisions of the deed of trust. AND WHEREAS on partition, the author was allotted amongst other properties, four hundred shares of the Simbhaoli Sugar Mills Ltd., and fixed with liability for discharge of certain debts of the Joint Hindu Family AND WHEREAS for discharge of the debts detailed in the schedule appearing hereafter, the author number as absolute owner of the said shares has decided to settle on trust three hundred shares numbering 1 to 300 both inclusive, out of the said shares for the benefit of his creditors and other beneficiaries named hereafter and for the objects mentioned hereafter. The author as holder of 300 shares out of the capital of Simbhaoli Sugar Mills Ltd. divesting himself of all proprietary rights in the said shares. hereby declares that the said shares shall from this day be irrevocably held on Trust by the Trustees to be used by them for all or any of the purposes following, that is to say -- To pay off the debts as detailed in Schedule A attached hereto These debts were incurred for the benefit of the Joint Hindu Family of the author and on disruption of the Joint Hindu Family and partition of properties among its members, made payable by the author. And after his debts are paid off. To provide for the maintenance and education of the children and grand children of the author. To open and run Hospitals and Nursing Homes. To open and run School or SchooLs for the education of boys or girls in scientific and technical subjects. To open and maintain a reading room and a lending library. To provide for the maintenance and education of orphans, widows and poor people and for that to give scholarships for inland and overseas studies to found orphanage. widow houses and poor houses and to do all other things that the trustees may deem fit for carrying out the objects of the Trust. By el. 3 four persons including the respondent were appointed trustees, and the respondent was to hold the office of Chairman of the Trust during his lifetime. The trust deed then provided In the books of the Company, the shares will stand in the name of the Chairman for the time being, who will have the power to operate the Bank accounts of the Trust, to preside at the meetings, exercise the right of th e vote in respect of the shares of the Trust. Clause 5 provided It is hereby declared that the trustees shall have the following powers in addition to the powers and the authorities hereinfore companytained-- The trustees shall number be entitled to sell the shares except as provided hereafter but they can mortgage or pledge the same for raising funds as they may feel necessary for paying off the debts of the author, provided  ii   iii   iv  Clause 6 provided That in carrying out the objects of the trust the trustees shall keep in mind and abide by the following directions- The payment of the debts of the author as detailed in Schedule A referred to above shall receive the topmost priority and the trustees shall number spend any money out of the trust property or its income in any direction till they have paid off all the debts of the author, provided always if the trustees are unable to pay off the debts, out of the income i.e. dividends, bonuses etc. of the shares within a period of ten years they shall be entitled to sell the same or part of it and thus pay off the debts that may be due at that time. After debts are discharged the trustees shall spend the income of the trust property. remaining in their hands after full discharge of the debts, on the maintenance of the children and grand children of the author and the remaining 20 on all or any of the other objects of the trust as the Trustees may think best.  iii  The respondent claimed before the Income-tax Officer, Eward. Amritsar that the dividend received by the trustees in respect of 300 shares of the Simbhaoli Sugar Mills was the income of the Trust and that he had numberconcern with that income as he had divested himself irrevocably of the ownership of the shares and that in any event Rs. 19,856/- being the amount due as interest to R. B. Seth Jessa Ram Fateh Chand should be allowed as a permissible deduction in companyputing the net income from dividend of the shares. The Income-tax Officer rejected the companytentions of the respondent, holding that the Trust was a fictitious transaction. The Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that the respondent had number irrevocably transferred the 300 shares of the Simbhaoli Sugar Mills and therefore by virtue of s. 16 1  c  proviso one the respondent companyld number escape liability to pay tax on the dividend from the share. The respondent appealed to the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal. but without success. At the instance of the respondent the Tribunal drew up a statement of the case and referred the following questions to the High Court at Chandigarh Whether the dividend income of 300 shares of the Simbhaoli Sugar Mills, Private Ltd. transferred by the assessee to S. Raghbir Singh Trust was the income of the assessee liable to tax? Whether the assessee was entitled to claim deduction of Rs. 19,856/- paid as interest to B. Seth Jessa Ram Fateh Chand against the dividend income of the aforesaid 300 shares? The High Court answered the first question in the negative and declined to answer the second question. With special leave. the Commissioner of Income-tax has appealed to this Court. Section 2 sub-s.  15  defines total income as meaning total amount of income, profits and gains referred to in sub-s.  1  of s. 4 companyputed in the manner laid down in the Act.