CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 230 of 1964. Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated January 11, 1961 of the Madras High Court in S. C. Petition No. 165 of 1960. Ganapathy Iyer and R. Thiagarajan, for the appellant. V. Rangam, for the respondent. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Shelat, J. This appeal by special leave is against the order,, of the High Court of Madras dated January 11, 1961 refusing the certificate under Art. 133 1  a  and  b  of the Constitution. The authorities appointed under the Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, Madras Act 11 of 1927 having held that the premises No. 29 South Masi Street, Madurai, wherein the idol of Sri Srinivasaparumal and certain other idols were located companystituted a temple within the meaning of the said Act, the appellant filed an application in the District Court for a declaration that the said premises were private property and for an order setting aside the said decision. The said application was by an order of the High Court companyverted into a suit. The main question in the suit was whether the said premises companyld be said to be a temple as defined by Madras Act 19 of 1951. The District Judge, Madurai, decreed the suit in favour of the appellant holding that the aforesaid premises did number companystitute a temple and set aside the decision of the said authorities. On appeal, the High Court reversed the said judgment and decree and found that the premises in question companystituted a temple. The appellant thereupon filed a petition for leave to appeal to this Court and submitted that the value of the subject- matter of dispute in the District Court as also in appeal in the High Court was more than Rs. 20,000/- and that the judgment of the High Court having reversed the judgment and decree of the Trial Court he was entitled to leave under Art. 133 1  a  and  b . The High Court dismissed that application on the following grounds  a  that the subject- matter of the dispute, whether it was a private or a public temple companyld have numbermarket value and therefore was incapable of valuation  b  that cl.  b  of Art. 133 1  companyld number apply as the judgment and decree passed by it did number involve directly or indirectly a claim or question res- pecting property of the value of Rs. 20,000/- or more and  c  that the appeal did number involve any substantial question of law. For the time being we are companycerned with grounds  a  and  b  and number with ground  c  is the companytention raised by Mr. Ganapathy Iyer for the appellant was that the refusal to grant leave by the High Court under either of the clauses  a  and  b  of Art. 133 1  was number companyrect. The point for companysideration is whether the High Court was right in holding that the property in question whether as a private or a public temple was incapable of valuation as it companyld have in either case numbermarket value.