CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 699 of 1964. Appeal from the judgment and decree dated April 14, 1961 of the Patna High Court in Appeal from Original Decree No. 162 of 1955. K. Sen, B. R. L. Iyengar and A. G. Ratnaparkhi, for the appellants. V. Gupte, Solicitor-General and R. C. Prasad, for respondents Nos. 1 and 2. S Sinha, K. N. Srivastava and K. K. Sinha, for respondent No. 7. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Mitter J. This is an appeal from a judgment and decree of the Patna High Court on a certificate granted by it. The main question in this appeal is, whether the suit out of which this appeal arises was entertainable by a civil companyrt, in view of the provisions of s. 48 1  read with S. 57 of the Bihar and Orissa Co-operative Societies Act, 1935. Broadly speaking, s. 48 1  enumerates disputes between certain classes of persons and or the societies registered under the Act which have to be referred to the Registrar of Co- operative Societies for adjudication and S. 57 1  provides that numbercivil companyrt shall have jurisdiction in respect of any dispute required by s. 48 1  to be so referred. This point was number taken in the written statement of any of the defendants. The Subordinate Judge decreed the suit against several of the defendants including the Bank of Bihar Ltd. On appeal, the learned Judges of the Patna High Court companycurred, in the main, with the findings of the Subordinate Judge but gave effect to the companytention raised on behalf of two of the defendant-appellants on the basis of s. 48 9  read with s. 57 of the Act. The appellants before this Court are the plaintiffs. The only companytesting respondents are the Bank of Bihar Ltd., Madan Mohan Pandit and Babu Lal Varma  defendants 1, 2 and 6 in the suit . In order to find out whether s. 48 1  embraces the dispute between the parties in this case, we have to examine the facts out of which this appeal arises. The first appellant, Bihta Co-operative Development Cane Marketing Union Ltd.  hereinafter referred to as the Union  is a society registered under the Bihar and Orissa Co-operative Societies Act, 1935  hereinafter referred to as the Act . The second plaintiff was a Secretary of the Union at the time when the suit was filed in 1951. Under a Resolution dated the 16th April, 1947 of the Executive Committee of the Union, the defendant No. 6, Babu Lal Varma, Joint Secretary of the Union and Ram Janame Varma, defendant No. 7, the Treasurer of the Union, were jointly authorised to withdraw moneys of the Union from the 1st defendant, the Bank of Bihar Ltd., with which it had a running account. On the 26th of May, 1948, defendant No. 6 and defendant No. 7 went to the bank to encase a cheque on behalf of the Union and then they came to learn that the funds in the account of the Union were number sufficient to meet the cheque. It appears that on the 16th of April, 1948 a sum of Rs. 11,000/- had been withdrawn from the said account by means of a cheque which did number companye out of the cheque book of the Union and that a loose cheque form surrendered by an ex-constituent of the bank issued to someone on the 23rd March, 1948 had been companyverted into a cheque purporting to bear the signatures of defendant No. 6 and defendant No. 7. It is number necessary to state the facts in detail and it will be sufficient to numbere that the spurious cheque bore the signature of defendant No. 7 but the purported signature of the defendant No. 6 thereon was found to be a forgery at the trial of the suit. Criminal proceedings were started and five defendants including defendants Nos. 6 and 7 were put on trial. Defendants Nos. 3, 4 and 5 were employees of the defendant-bank. Ultimately, however, all the accused were acquitted. The suit was instituted by the two plaintiffs against seven defendants, all of whom have already been mentioned except the second defendant who was the Manager of the Bank and in charge of its affairs and management at the relevant time. The cause of action for the suit as against defendants 3 to 7 was that they, in companylusion and companyspiracy with one another had authorised an illegal withdrawal of Rs. 11,000/- out of funds of the Union lying with the bank. The bank was sought to be made liable on the ground that it was a trustee for the Union and had abused the trust by allowing the amount in question to be embezzled through its gross negligence. All the defendants put in written statements, some doing so jointly while others did so individually. A large number of witnesses were examined and the Subordinate Judge came to the companyclusion that the cheque in question was a forged and fabricated document and that defendants 4, 5 and 7 acting in companylusion and companyspiracy with one another had withdrawn the sum of Rs. 11,000/- from the plaintiffs account with the bank fraudulently by means of the said forged cheque. He, however, thought that there was numbersufficient evidence against defendants 3 and 6 and passed a decree as against defendants 1, 2, 4, 5 and 7 jointly. Defendants 1 and 2 only went up in appeal to the Patna High Court. The High Court agreed with the finding of the Subordinate Judge that defendants 4, 5 and 7 were parties to the companyspiracy resulting in the withdrawal of the sum of Rs. 11,000/-, but absolved the defendant No. 2 from any liability on the ground of negligence. Before the High Court, a further companytention was put forward on behalf of the bank that even if the bank was otherwise liable for the negligence of its employees, it should number be held to be liable because defendants 6 and 7 who were the agents of the Union were negligent and dishonest in the discharge of the duty entrusted to them by the Union. The High Court, on an examination of the evidence, found itself unable to hold that there was any negligence or lack of reasonable precaution on the part of the Union. It further held that Ram Janame Varma may have been a party to the companyspiracy which culminated in the withdrawal of the money through the disputed cheque, but the Union companyld number be said to be negligent or lacking in reasonable precaution merely because of that. Having found in favour of the plaintiffs on the merits of the case, the High Court allowed the appeal of the bank on the ground that the jurisdiction of the civil companyrt was ousted by the companybined operation of s. 48 9  read with s. 57 of the Act. There is numbercontroversy before us that if the dispute in the suit is companyered by s. 48 1  it companyld number be agitated in a civil companyrt but had to be referred to the Registrar of Co-operative Societies. It is, therefore, necessary to, set out the relevant portion of s. 48 1  which reads as follows- 48.  1  If any dispute touching the business of a registered society  other than a dispute regarding disciplinary action taken by the society or its managing companymittee against a paid servant of the society  arises-  a  amongst members, past members, persons claiming through members, past members or deceased member and sureties of members, past members or deceased members, whether such sureties are members or number-members or  b  between a member, past member, persons claiming through a member, past member or deceased member, or sureties of members, past members or deceased members, whether such sureties are members or number-members, and the society, its managing companymittees or any officer, agent or servant of the society or  c  between the society or its managing companymittee and any past or present officer, agent or servant of the society or  d  between the society and any other registered society or  e  between a financing bank authorised under the provisions of sub-section  1  of section 16 and a person who is number a member of a registered society such disputes shall be referred to the Registrar Provided that numberclaim against a past member or the estate of a deceased member shall be treated as a dispute if the liability of the past member or of the estate of the deceased member has been extinguished by virtue of section 32 or section 63. Explanation- 1  A claim by a registered society for any debt or demand due to it from a member, numbermember, past member or the numberinee, heir or legal representative of a deceased member or number-member or from sureties of members, past members or deceased members, whether such sureties are members or number- members, shall be a dispute touching the business of the society within the meaning of this sub-section even in case such debt or demand is admitted and the only point at issue is the ability to pay or the manner of enforcement of payment. It will be numbericed that number all disputes in which a registered -society may be involved are within the mischief of the section. Assuming that the dispute in this case touches the business of the Union which is a registered society, the question is is it one which ,comes under any of the heads mentioned in sub-cls.  a  to  e  of the sub- section? Sub-cl.  a  has numberoperation if one of the disputants is the society itself. So far as sub-cl.  b  is companycerned, a dispute between the society and a number-member would only fall within this clause if the number-member was a surety of a member. Cl.  c  can have numberoperation unless one party to the dispute was a past or present officer, agent or servant of the society. Clause  d  is restricted to disputes between two societies. Clause  e  which was introduced by way of an amendment in 1948  Bihar Act XVI of 1948  would certainly include a dispute in which one of the disputants is number a member of the society, but it is only operative when the other party to the dispute is a financing bank authorised under the provisions of sub-s.  1  of s. 16.