Shah, J. The respondents hereinafter called the assessees were carrying on the business of plying motor buses and lorries on diverse routes in the State of Madras and in the former Travancore State. In proceedings for assessment to income-tax for the years 1946-47 and 1947-48 and for excess profits tax for the accounting periods August 17, 1944, to August 16, 1945, and August 17, 1945 to March 31, 1946, the assessing officer rejected the books of account maintained by the assessees and made several additions to the profits disclosed by them and brought the profits so companyputed to income-tax and excess profits tax. The orders of the assessing officer were companyfirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner. The Appellate Tribunal dismissed the appeals against those orders observing that the final companyputation of the profits made by the Income-tax Officer gave an average rate very much less than Rs. 4,000 per vehicle, and that the final assessments at rates less than the rates uniformly followed in other bus and lorry cases companyld number be said to be excessive or unreasonable. The Tribunal declined to deal with the companytentions raised in the appeal about the individual items since in their view those companytentions had a direct bearing on this final quantum and the assessees had failed to discharge The primary onus on them to show that the overall quantum is excessive. The Tribunal submitted a statement of the case under section 66 2  of the Indian Income-tax Act to the High Court of Madras and referred the question whether the Tribunal was justified in estimating the income of the assessees and refusing to companysider the companytentions put forward by them. The High Court held that the Tribunal was bound to determine whether the purchase price of charcoal and the estimate of gross receipts by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner were excessive, and that the Tribunal should, instead of determining whether the gross amount of the estimated income was excessive, have determined the companytention raised by the assessees individually. Counsel for the assessees urged before the High Court that when specific additions were made in the total profits on the grounds of Suppressed income and inflated expenditure the Appellate Assistant Commissioner companyld number add other items under the head Unexplained cash credits. The High Court declined to pronounce their opinion on that companytention, and observed that it would be open to the Tribunal to companysider that companytention in deciding what should be the assessee in the relevant years.