CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No, 695 of 1965. Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated June 17, 18, 1964 of the Gujarat High Court in Civil Revision Application No. 430 of 1961. Purshottam Trikamdas and I. N. Shroff, for the appellant., V. Gupte, Solicitor-General, G. L. Sanghi and B. R. Agar- wala, for respondents Nos. 1 and 2. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Wanchoo, J. This is In appeal by special leave against the judgment of the Gujarat High Court. Brief facts necessary for present purposes are these. A suit was brought by respondents Nos. 1 and 2  hereinafter referred to as the respondents  against the appellant and three Others in the Court of Judge Small Causes at Ahmedabad, under s. 28 of the Bombay Rents. Hotel -and Lodging House Rates Control Act, No. LVII of 1947,  hereinafter referred to as the Act . The case of the respondents was that the other three persons who were defendants Nos. 1 to 3 were the tenants-in-chief of the premises while the present appellant who was defendant No. 4 was their sub- tenant. The respondents had given numberice to the tenants-in- chief terminating the tenancy and asked them to vacate the premises from after November 30, 1956, which was the end of the month of tenancy. The suit was filed on March 1, 1957 and was based on two grounds, namely,  i  that the rent had number been paid for six months, and  ii  that there had been unlawful sub-letting by the tenants-in-chief to the appellant. The suit was resisted by the three tenants-in- chief. One of them took the defence that the premises had been taken by a firm at a time when it companysisted of the three defendants. But later defendant No. 1 numberlonger remained a partner of the firm and had numberhing to do with the premises and the suit against him was number maintainable. Defendants Nos. 2 and 3 on the other hand companytended that the rent claimed  i.e., Rs. 26  was excessive and prayed that standard rent should be fixed for the premises. These defendants further said that defendant No. 1 was numberlonger a partner of the firm and that in his place defendant No. 4  i.e., the present appellant  had become partner. Thus defendants Nos. 2 and 3 denied that there was any sub- letting, unlawful or otherwise, to the appellant. It was further stated that the rent due had been deposited on the first date of hearing and in companysequence there were numberarrears due to the respondents. The appellant also filed a written-statement. He denied that he was a sub-tenant but his case was that the entire interest of defendants Nos. 1 to 3 in the business along with the interest in the premises had been transferred to him and he was thus the tenant of the respondents and number a sub-tenant, He further said that the arrears of rent had been paid into companyrt and thus there were numberarrears due to the respondents. On these pleadings, the trial companyrt framed four issues. The first issue was whether defendants Nos. 1 to 3 were in arrears and it was held that they were number in arrears. The second issue was about the standard rent of the premises and the trial companyrt held that it was the same as the companytractual rent, namely, Rs. 26 per mensem. The third issue was whether defendants Nos. 1 to 3 had sublet the premises and the fourth issue was whether there was an assignment in favour of the present appellant by defendants Nos. 1 to 3 of their interest. The trial companyrt held that defendants Nos. 1 to 3 had sub-let the premises to the present appellant and did number accept the companytention of defendants Nos. 2 and 3 about partnership or of the appellant about assignment. Finally the trial companyrt held on the basis of the amendment of the Act in 1959 that there companyld be numbereviction. It therefore dismissed tie suit against all the four defendants, namely, the three tenants-in- chief and the appellant so far as eviction was companycerned. It further ordered the tenants-in-chief to pay rent from September 1, 1956 upto date at the rate of Rs. 26 per mensem. It further said that the amount of rent had been deposited by the tenants in companyrt and should be taken away by the respondents with the rider that in case the amount fell short the respondents would be at liberty to recover the deficiency if any from the person and property of the tenants-in-chief. Finally the suit was dismissed in toto against the present appellant. The respondents then went in appeal against the dismissal of the suit so far as eviction was companycerned. To this appeal the three tenants-in-chief and the appellant were made parties, and the main companytention of the respondents in the appellate companyrt was that the suit for eviction should have been decreed both on the ground of arrears of rent and on the ground of sub-letting. Two main questions were formulated by the appellate companyrt for decision, namely i  whether the tenants-in-chief were tenants in arrears and whether the respondents were entitled to possession from the present appellant on the ground that he was number a sub-tenant and also on the ground that he was number protected under s. 15  2  of the Act as amended in 1959. On the question of arrears, the appellate companyrt held that there were numberarrears. But on the other question the appellate companyrt seems to have taken a curious view. It did number examine the companyrectness of the view taken by the trial companyrt that the present appellant was a sub-tenant. It took the view that as the present appellant had in his written- statement denied that he was a sub-tenant, he companyld number be a sub-tenant. It then went on to hold that as the present appellant was in possession and as he was number a sub-tenant on his own showing he must be held to be a trespasser because be had failed to prove assignment. So holding that the present appellant was a trespasser, it ordered his ejectment on the ground that benefit of s. 15  2  as amended in 1959 companyld only be available to a sub-tenant, which the present appellant was number on his own showing. The appellate companyrt therefore allowed the appeal, set aside the decree of the trial companyrt and ordered that the present appellant should hand over possession of the suit premises to the respondents within six months of the order of the appellate companyrt. We have said that the view taken by the appellate companyrt was curious because the appellate companyrt does number seem to have ordered the ejectment of the tenants-in-chief. At least there is numberhing in the judgment of the appellate companyrt to show this, though it is certainly said therein that the trial companyrts decree was set aside. Then followed a revision under s. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure in the High Court by the present appellant. It seems that the tenants-in-chief took numberaction after the judgment of the appellate companyrt, may- be because there was numberhing in that judgment which went against them. Tile High Court held that the appellate companyrt was number right in setting aside the finding that the present appellant was a sub-tenant of the three tenants-in-chief without going into it. The High Court also seems to have held that in the circumstances the finding of sub-letting stood unchallenged and in view of that finding the present appellant was entitled to companytend that he was protected under s. 15  2  of the Act.