CIVIl, APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 1613 of 1966. Appeal from the judgment and decree dated August 19, 1963 of the Punjab High Court, Circuit Bench at Delhi in Letters Patent Appeal No. 50-D of 1960. A. Seyid Muhammad, S.P. Nayar and B.D. Sharma, for the appellants. T. Desai, K.L.Arora, Bishambar Lal and H.K. Puri, for the respondent. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Ramaswami, J. This appeal is brought by certificate from the judgment of the Division Bench of the Punjab High Court dated August 19, 1963 in Letters Patent Appeal No. 50- D of 1960. An auction was held for the sale of licence of companyntry liquor shop in Bela Road for the year 1949-50 on March 23, 1949. The auction took place in pursuance of the companyditions of Auction of Excise Shops in Delhi for the year 1949-50 Ex. D-28. Clauses 31 and 33 of the companyditions were to the following effect The Chief Commissioner is under numberobligation to grant any license until he is assured of financial status of the bidder. At the companyclusion of the auction an enquiry will be made into the financial position of any bidder number known to the excise staff and any such bidder shall if necessary be called upon to furnish security for the observance of the terms of his licence as required by sub- section  2  of section 34 of the Punjab Excise Act 1 of 1914, as extended to Delhi Province. All final bids will be made subject to the companyfirmation by the Chief Commissioner who may reject any bid without assigning any reasons. If numberbid is accepted for any shop, the Chief Commissioner reserves the right to dispose. it off by tender or otherwise as he thinks The respondent offered the highest bid of Rs. 4,01,000/- for the shop. Under the Excise Rules the bidder had to deposit one-sixth of the purchase price within seven days of the auction but the deposit was number made by the respondent. In these circumstances the Chief Commissioner did number companyfirm the bid of the respondent and resale of the Excise Shop was ordered. On May 3, 1949 the shop was again auctioned when Messrs Daulat Ram Amar Singh offered the highest bid of Rs. 2,20,000/- which was companyfirmed by the Chief Commissioner, on July 7, 1949. Holding the respondent liable for the loss of Rs. 1,81,000 being the difference between the bid of the respondent and of Messrs Daulat Ram Amar Snigh the Collector of Delhi started proceedings for the recovery of Rs. 1,81,000,. . On July 22, 1949 the respondent filed a suit in the companyrt of Senior Subordinate Judge, Delhi praying for a permanent injunction restraining the appellants from taking any proceedings to recover the amount. The trial judge decreed the suit holding that the sale was subject to companyfirmation by the Chief Commissioner under cl. 33 and since the auction in favour of the respondent was number accepted by him there was numberbinding obligation between the parties. The decree of the trial companyrt was upheld by the lower appellate companyrt. In second appeal False, J., took the view that cl. 3 3 was number in companysonance with the statutory rules and the companytract came into existence when the bidding was closed in favour of the respondent on March 23, 1949. The respondent was therefore held liable to make good the loss which the Government sustained in resorting to the resale of the excise shop. The resportdent preferred an appeal under Letters Patent. The Division Bench allowed the appeal reversing the decision of the single Judge and restored that of the trial companyrt. Clause 21 of rule 5.34 states A person to whom a shop has been sold shall pay one-sixth of the annual fee within seven days of the auction  any deposits already made shall be credited to this sum, and any excess shall be either returned to him or credited to future payments . By the 7th of the month in which he begins his business under his license and by the 7th of every subsequent month the licensee shall pay one-twelfth of the annual fee till the whole fee is paid. But he may at any time pay the whole amount due if he wishes.