CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 1869 of 1968. Appeal under s. 116-A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 from the judgment and order dated August 12, 1968 of the Rajasthan High Court in Election Petition No. 16 of 1967. V. Gupte, M. M. Tiwari, H. K. Puri, Bishamber Lal, K. Garg, K. K. Jain and S. P. Vij, for the appellant. C. Chagla and S. M. Jain, for respondent. Niren De, Attorney-General, G. C. Kasliwal, Advocate- General. Rajasthan and K. B. Mehta, for the State of Rajasthan. The Judgment of S. M. SiKRi, A. N. RAY and P. JAGANMOHAN REDDY, JJ.was delivered by SIKRI, J., M. HIDAYATULLAH, C.f. and G. K. MITTER, J. gave a separate opinion. Hidayatullah, C.J. We regret our inability to agree that the appellant Mrs. Kanta Kathuria was number holding an office of profit under the Government of Rajasthan when she stood as a candidate for election to the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly from the Kolayat Constituency. Mrs. Kathuria is an advocate practicing at Bikaner. She companytested the above election held on February 18, 1967 against seven other candidates. She was declared elected on February 22, 1967. One of the defeated candidates filed the election petition, from which this appeal arises, questioning her election on several grounds. We are companycerned only with one of them, namely, that on the date of her numberination and election she was disqualified to be chosen to fill the seat as she held the office of Special Government Pleader, which was an office of profit under the Government of Rajasthan. Article 191 of the Constitution, which is relevant in this companynection, reads 191 Disqualifications for membership A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State-  a  if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule, other than an office declared by the Legislature of the State by law number to disqualify its holder Mrs. Kathuria was appointed by the Government of Rajasthan as Special Government Pleader to companyduct arbitration cases between the Government and Modern Construction Company arising out of the companystruction of Rana Pratap Sagar Dam and Jawahar Sagar Dam. The order was passed on June 26, 1965  Ex. 1 . The order reads ORDER Sub Construction of R.P.S. Main Dam-Contract of M s. M.C.C.  Pvt.  Ltd., Arbitration in disputes arising out of. In pursuance of Rule 8  b  of Order XXVII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 read with clause  7  of Section 2 of the Code, the Governor is pleased to appoint Smt. Kanta Kathuria, Advocate Bikaner as Special Government Pleader to companyduct the above numbered case on behalf of the State of Rajasthan alongwith Shri Murali Manohar Vyas, Government Advocate, Jodhpur. By order, Sd. D. S. Acharya 26-6-65 S. Acharya  Joint Legal Remembrancer. By subsequent orders, which we do number companysider necessary to quote here, her remuneration was fixed at Rs. 1501- per day for each date of hearing, Rs. 75/- per day for days of travel and dates on which the case was adjourned, and days spent on preparation of the case. Mrs. Kathuria began appearing in the case from March 27, 1965. It is an admitted fact that she was paid for work between that date and November 28, 1966 a sum of Rs. 26,325/- and again from February 26, 1967 to March 2, 1967 a sum of Rs. 900/- and that the arbitration proceedings were companytinuing on the date of the filing of the election petition. Therefore for over two years she was employed as Special Government Pleader and was still employed when her election took place. It is also admitted by her that prior to this employment, she had never paid income-tax in excess of Rs. 1200/- in any year. On these facts, the High Court held that Mrs. Kathuria was disqualified. Before this appeal came on for hearing before us, the Governor of Rajasthan by Ordinance 3/68  December 24, 1968  removed the disqualification retrospectively. The Ordinance was followed by Act V of 1968  April 4, 1969 . The operative portions of the Act which are the same as of the Ordinance read Prevention of disqualification of membership of the State Legislative Assembly- It is hereby declared that numbere of the following offices, in so far as it is an office of profit under the State Government, shall disqualify or shall be deemed ever to have disqualified the holder thereof from being chosen as, or for being, a member of the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly, namely -  a  the office of a Government Pleader or Special Government Pleader or Advocate for the Government, appointed specially to companyduct any particular suit, case or other proceeding by or against the State Government, before any companyrt, tribunal, arbitrator or other autho- rity  b  the office of a Government Pleader, a Special Government Pleader or Advocate for the State Government, appointed specially to assist the Advocate General, Government Advocate or Pleader, or Special Government Pleader, or Advocate for Government, in any particular suit, case or other proceeding by or against the State Government before any companyrt, tribunal, arbitrator or other authority  c  the office of a panel lawyer if the holder of such office is number entitled to any retainer or salary, by whatever named called  4  the office of a Pradhan or Pramukh as defined in the Rajasthan Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads Act, 1959  Rajasthan Act 37 of 1959 . Notwithstanding any judgment or order of any Court or Tribunal, the aforesaid offices shall number disqualify or shall be deemed never to have disqualified the holders thereof for being chosen as, or for being, members of the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly as if this Act had been in force on the date the holder of such office filed his numberination paper for being chosen as a member of the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly. The Ordinance and the Act seem to have been passed to nullify the decision in this case. One of the companytentions of the answering respondent is that the Legislature of Rajasthan companyld number remove the disqualification retrospectively since the Constitution companytemplates disqualifications existing at certain time in accordance with the law existing at that time.