CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeals Nos. 1421 and 1422 of 1968. Appeals by special leave from the order dated January 18, 1968 of the Additional Commissioner for workmens companypensation, Madras in M.S.E. Case No. 131 of 1966, and from the Order dated the 9th January, 1968 of the Commissioner of Labour, Madras in No. C2. 13897 of 1967 respectively. P. Malhotra, Sat Pal and Ashok Grover, for the appellant  in both the appeals . Natesan and D. N. Gupta, for respondent No. 1  in both the appeals . The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Jaganmohan Reddy, J.-These appeals are by special leave in which the question which falls for companysideration is whether the appellant is a person employed within the meaning of section 2 12   iii  of the Madras Shops Establishments Act, 1947  Madras Act No. XXXVI of 1947   hereinafter called the Act . The first respondent, a private limited companypany,  hereinafter termed as the holding companypany or the Madras companypany , having been empowered by the Memorandum of Association, promoted another companypany known as the Gordon Woodroffe Leather Manufacturing Company  hereinafter called the subsidiary companypany or the Pallavaram companypany  in which it held 80 preference shares and 70 equity shares. The holding companypany was also the managing agent of the subsidiary companypany. In 1959 the managing agency of the holding companypany was terminated but nevertheless in view of its shareholding it companytinued to companytrol the subsidiary companypany. The appellant who was a Chartered Accountant qualified in London had applied for and was offered employment as an Assistant in the holding companypany on the terms and companyditions companytained in the letter dated 19-10-1963. He accepted the employment and the terms and was accordingly appointed by the holding companypany. On 28-10-1965 the holding companypany, in order to simplify the accounting procedures, informed the appellant of its decision to offer revision of the terms of engagement with effect from 1st July, 1965 relating to the basic salary, A. and bonus, all other terms of service remaining unaltered. The Appellant was asked to companyfirm his acceptance of these terms which it appears he did. He was thereafter permitted to cross the efficiency bar. It may here be mentioned that after his appointment, the appellant was given training in the Madras companypany for two months after which it is alleged that the Director had asked him to go to the Pallavaram companypany to work there. Even while working there his salary was being paid by the Madras companypany though it was by an. arrangement between the two companypanies being debited to the, Pallavaram companypany. The appellant companytinued to work in the Pallavaram companypany till 15th October, 1966 on which date, his services were terminated by the holding companypany. The appellant thereupon filed an appeal before the Additional Commissioner for Workmans Compensation under section 41 2  of the Workmens Compensation Act. The 1st respondent, however, raised an objection before the Additional Commissioner that the appel- lant was number a person employed within the meaning of the Act and, therefore, the provisions of the said Act would number be applicable to him. In view of this objection, was filed by the. appellant under section 51 of the Act for declaring that he is a person employed and some time thereafter got his applications under section 41 2  stayed. The his between the parties on the application under section 51 as well as. under section 41 2  was whether the appellant was an employee of the holding companypany or of the subsidiary companypany. The appellant claimed that under the terms of the offer of appointment which was accepted by him he was required, to work either in the Madras office or the Palla- varam office or at any other office or place of business of the companypany and though he. was working in the Pallavaram office, his salary was being paid by the holding companypany, his bonus for the year ending 1964 was also paid by that companypany which also, terminated his services. The 1st respondent averred that though the petitioner might have been appointed or dismissed by the Madras companypany he was actually a person employed in the Pallavaram companypany. It was also admitted that while the salary of the appellant was paid initially by the Madras companypany it was recovered from the Pallavaram companypany as is evident from the, registers of account maintained that such recoveries from the Pallavaram companypany was effected, and that for the purposes of the Act what is relevant is number employment by but employment in. If so as he was employed in the Pallavaram companypany he was number a person employed within the definition of the Act by the Madras companypany. The Commissioner of Labour by his order of 9th January, 1968 accepted the 1st respondents companytention and held that the petitioner cannot be declared to be a person employed under section 2  12   iii  of the Act and that even under section 2   12   ii  of the Act, the petitioner cannot be treated as a person employed vis-a-vis the Pallavaram Company as admittedly the appellant was number a member of the clerical staff employed in the Pallavaram companypany. The petition was accordingly dismissed. After this appeal was dismissed the appeal filed under section 41 2  of the Act was disposed of by the, Additional Commissioner for Workmens Compensation who held that in view of the findings given by the companypetent authority under Section 51 of the Act on the question of applicability of the provisions of that Act to the appellant, he had number jurisdiction to go into the merits of the appeal. He accordingly dismissed that appeal also. It may be stated that the appellants Special Leave Petition was filed against both the Orders but in view of the, objection raised by the office, two S.L.Ps. were filed and this Court gave leave on them. These two appeals were subsequently companysolidated. On behalf of the appellant the following two questions were urged for determination  1  whether on the facts and circumstances of the case and on a true companystruction of clause  iii  subsection  12  of section 2, the appellant being wholly and principally employed in companynection with the business of the Madras establishment was a person employed,  2  whether the jurisdiction of the authority under section 41 sub-section  2  is circumscribed by the provisions of section 51. In our view the second question is purely academic because if the jurisdiction of the authority under section 41 2  is circumscribed by the provisions of section 51 the question whether the decision of the Commissioner of Labour under section 51 that the appellant is a person employed will nevertheless arise for decision and if it is number even then that question would fall for determination. In any view we have to ascertain what under the provisions of the Act is meant by a person employed and whether the appellant is one such. If he is a person employed then the Additional Commissioner of Workmens Compensation has to, go into the allegation of the appellant that his services were number terminated in accordance with the provisions of section 41  1  . A person employed has been defined under the Act and in so far as it is relevant for the purposes of the appeal, section 2 12   ii   iii  alone need be companysidered. These are set out as under 2 12  person employed means- in the case of a factory or an industrial undertaking, a member of the clerical staff employed in such factory or undertaking in the case of a companymercial establishment other than a clerical department of a factory or an industrial undertaking, a person wholly or principally employed in companynection with the business of the establishment, and includes a peon It is number disputed that the Pallavaram companypany is a factory and that the appellant is number a member of the clerical staff in that factory. In view of this, admission, the appellant cannot be a person employed under clause 2  12   ii  number because he is employed in the Pallavaram companypany which is itself a matter that has to be determined, but because he is number a member of the clerical staff employed in that factory. The appellants case, therefore, has to be examined under clause  iii  of sub-section  12  of section 2. It has to be numbericed that an establishment for the purposes of the clause must be a companymercial establishment and even if the clerical department of a factory or an industrial undertaking falls within the definition of companymercial establishment, he is number a person in the clerical department of a factory or an industrial undertaking, but is one who is wholly or principally employed in companynection with the business of the companymercial establishment.