As regards addition of Rs. 2992-95 to the amount of Rs. 7,499-11 found by the High Court, it can be pointed out that there is numberjustification in adding this amount to the total because Exts. 86 ad 87 were given on behalf of Jan Singh and Congress parties, whose names also had been written on those chits by the persons signing them at the petrol pump. Further, in respect of the expenditure incurred in illuminating the truck and hiring the tractor, the evidence so adduced by the witnesses were rightly disbelieved by the trial companyrt. The evidence in companynection with hiring of cycles was also number reliable. Similarly the trial Court had rightly rejected the evidence in companynection with Kirti Hotel expenses of Rs 1,959/-. As regards the amounts paid to Laxmi Litho works for printing etc. the High Court was right when it said that Ex. 62 was a companysolidated receipt of Rs. 765/- and this amount had been included in the return of election expenses. Similarly, the High Court had rightly rejected the allegation of certain petrol expenses incurred by the 1st respondent. A sum of Rs. 1,938-50 however, is number accounted for and in absence of satisfactory explanation, this amount has to be taken as election expenses and must, therefore, be added. Even if the companytention of the petitioner is accepted that Rs. 1,939/- incurred by Bhan dalal for which numberaccount was given, Rs. 100/- paid towards the salary of Hari, the driver, Rs. 695/- in respect of Sakhare Rs. 192-40 or say Rs. 192/in respect of petrol, Rs. 600/- regarding hire charges of a taxi, hired by the father-in-law of the 1st respondent and Rs. 129/- incurred for Shende, respondent number 1, the several items will amount to Rs. 3,655/-. If these amounts are added to the election expenses already shown, it would companye to Rs. 11,154. Even on this seeking, the election expenses are well within the limit of Rs. 12.000/- and companysequently the appellants charge against the 1st respondent for companymitting companyrupt practice under Sub-s.  6  of s. 123 of the Act is number established. As regards the statement made by a protagonist of a separate Vidarbha with the companysent of the 1st respondent that the second respondent paid a bribe of Rs. 60,000/- to the first respondent to withdraw from the companytest and the allegation that the said false statement appeared in a paper with the companysent of the 1st respondent, the 1st respondent denied that the above statement was ever made or that it was made in his presence or with his companysent, number did he have any knowledge that it was published paper with this companysent or that the paper was acting as his agent. Further, the trial companyrt held that the witnesses who gave evidence in support of the allegations were number present at the meeting. it was number proved that the first respondent ever companysented at the second respondent to make the alleged false statement. The trial companyrt, therefore, rightly rejected the allegations. In examining the question whether the allegations about the companymission of companyrupt practices by a returned candidate, the Court has to keep in view that the allegations about the companymission of companyrupt practices are of a quasi-criminal nature, the proof whereof has a double companysequence of number only setting aside the election of the returned candidate, but also imposing subsequent disqualification debarring him from becoming a candidate at any election for a period of 6 years. Inasmuch as the charge is a serious one and is of a quasi-criminal nature, the onus of Proving the essential ingredients prescribed by sub-s. 4  of s. 123 is on the person who allege them. In the present case, from the evidence, it is number proved that the offending statement was made by Dhote an agent of respondent number1, in the meeting or that it was made with the companysent of respondent number 1, The appellants have number established the companyrupt practice under this head also by any credible evidence. As regards the companyts incurred in section 96 and 119 of the Act, it means what is actually spent,. Accordingly, in the present case, it was incumbent in the High Court to award companyts to the first respondent which companyts he was entitled to if he companyld show that he bad incurred them. Admittedly, there was numberproof of payment of any fee to companynsel by the first respondent. As such,he will number been titled to the amount of Rs.400/- per diem awarded by the High Court. The first respondent cannot be allowed to file any fee certificate before this Court since he had number done earlier. Laxminarayan v. Returning Officer, C. A. No. 1014 of 1972 decided on September 28, 1973, referred to. CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 901 of 1973. Appeal under Section 116A of the Representation of the People Act 1957 from the judgment and order dated the 12th February, 1973 of the High Court at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, Nagpur, in Election Petition No. 2 of 1972. H. Deshpande, A.Shelat, N. M. Ghatate and S. Balakrishnan, for the appellants. N. Kherdekar, V. S. Sirpurkar, K. V. Sirpurkar, C. K. Ratnaparkhi and A. G. Ratnaparkhi, for respondent number 1. Gulab Rao Patel and Shiv Pujan Singh, for respondent Nos. 2- 4. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by JAGANMOHAN REDDY, J.-The first respondent Govind Ramji Shende was declared elected as a member of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly from Bhandara general companystituency on March 11, 1972. Fifteen persons had filed their numberination papers, before the last date for filing the numberinations on February 8, 1972. These numberination papers were duly scrutinised on February 9, 1972 and accepted as valid. By the date fixed for withdrawal on February 11, 1972, eleven persons who had filed their numberinations withdrew their candidature leaving only four persons to companytest the election. Of these the first respondent companytested the election as an independent candidate, the second respondent Tirpude companytested on Congress  R  ticket, the third respondent companytested as a Republican Party  Khobragade Group  and the fourth respondent as a Republican Party  Gaikwad Group  candidates. These candidates polled respectively 41,511 24,224 3,585 and 564 votes. As we have said earlier, the first respondent was declared elected as he had polled the highest number of votes and with a substantial majority of 17,287 votes. Four electors from the companystituency, of whom the first petitioner Baburao Bagaji Karemore was one, filed a joint petition challenging the election of the first respondent on various, grounds of companyrupt practices under s. 100 read with sub-ss.  1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  3A ,  4 ,  5  and  6  of s. 123 and for companytravention of the provisions of s. 127A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951-hereinafter called the Act. It was alleged in the petition that the first respondent did number keep separate and companyrect account of all the expenditure incurred and authorised in companynection with his election between the date of the publication of the numberification of holding the election and the date of the declaration of the results thereof. Nor were these accounts kept in accordance with the provisions of s. 77 of the Act read with r. 86 of the Conduct of Election Rules-hereinafter called the Rules by number showing distinctly the date on which the expenditure was incurred or authorised, the nature of the expenditure, the amount of the expenditure, i.e, the amount paid and the amount outstanding, the date of payment, the names and addresses of payers, the serial number of bills and the names and addresses of the persons to whom outstanding are payable. It is also alleged that the first respondent has number obtained a voucher for every item of expenditure and the vouchers are number arranged serially in chronological order according to the date of payment as prescribed by s. 77 of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. Although the outside limit of the expenditure which a candidate at an election to the Legislative Assembly was Rs. 12,000/- the first respondent suppressed many items of expenditure which were in excess of that amount such as expenditure on items relating to petrol, vehicles, printing, painting, loudspeaker and generator, hire charges of cycles, badges, serving of food and refreshment, processions and public meetings, bands, companystruction of booths, payment made to workers, office establishment etc. Apart from these suppressions, it is also alleged that M. T. Dalal 1 R. W. 1, and Shivshankar Ninave 1 R. W. 10 who were active agents of the first respondent were carrying on systematic propaganda on his behalf and they were also incurring expenditure with the companysent of the first respondent as well as his election agent Bhole and were authorised to incur expenditure on behalf of the first respondent. Apart from these two persons it was also alleged that Kharabe and Wagner, father- in-law and maternal uncle respectively of the first respondent and Ramaji Gaidhane who were actually carrying on a systematic election campaign and propaganda on behalf of the first respondent also incurred expenses on various items with the companysent and authority of the first respondent and his election agent Bhole, which expenses were number shown in the return of election expenditure submitted by the first respondent. Several other instances were also given by the petitioners and it was alleged that if all these items of expenditure were included in the return of expenditure, the limit of Rs. 12,000/would exceed. Secondly, it was alleged by the petitioners that in an election meeting held at Shahid Maidan of Bhandara on February 18, 1972 on behalf of the first respondent Jambuwantrao Dhote, who belonged to the Maha Vidarbha Sangharash Samiti and was actively supporting the candidature of the first respondent , made a false statement of fact which he himself as well as the first respondent either believed to be false or did number believe it to be true in relation to the personal character and companyduct of respondent No. 2 Tirpude as well as petitioner No. 1 Karemore. The said Jambuwantrao Dhote is alleged to have made a statement in his speech in that meeting that the res- pondent No. 2  Tirpude  secured the withdrawal of the petitioner No. 1  Karemore  by giving him a bribe of Rs. 60,000/-. It was also alleged that these false statements were, made by Dhote in the presence of the first respondent and with his companysent and that the first. respondent was present in that meeting when Dhote delivered the speech and also spoke subsequently in the same meeting. According to the petitioners, the first respondent got the said statement published in the Bhandara Times, a weekly, in its issue dated February 23, 1972, which newspaper was for all practical purposes acting as his agent. At any rate, the statement was published with the companysent of the first respondent and his election agent. It was again alleged that the first respondent also got printed or caused to be printed election pamphlets and posters in which appeal to the voters on the grounds of caste and companymunity was made. In this companynection it was averred that the electors were asked to refrain from voting in favour of respondent No. 2  Tirpude  and other candidates on the ground of their race, caste and companymunity and were asked to vote for himself on the ground of his race, caste and companymunity with a view to further the prospects of his election and to prejudicially affect the election of other companytesting candidates. The petitioners gave instances to show how this propaganda was carried on by issuing pamphlets by making it appear to the voters by statements of facts which were false and which the first respondent or the maker either believed to be false or did number believe to be true. The first respondent denied that he made any statements in relation to the personal character or companyduct of the second respondent Tirpude, number did his election agent or his workers with his companysent or that of his election agent make any such statements, number companyld it be said that any of those statements were reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of Tirpudes election. While admitting that Bhole W. 40 was his election agent, he denied that he himself or his election agent Bhole or any other person with his companysent or that of his election agent companymitted any of the companyrupt practices alleged in the petition, or that the alleged companyrupt practices had materially affected the result of the election, It was also averred that the expenditure shown by him in the return of expenses was companyrect and the return was in accordance with law and the Rules framed in that behalf that there was number1 companytravention of the provisions of s. 77 of the Act read with r. 86 of the Rules and denied that he incurred expenditure much more than Rs. 12,000/- as alleged in the petition. It was also denied that M. T. Dalal 1 R. W. 1 and Shivshankar Ninave 1 R.W. 10 were his. active agents and were carrying out systematic propaganda on his behalf or were incurring expenditure with his companysent as well as of his election agent B.H. Bhole. All these all negations with respect to the part said to have been played by M. T. Dalal also known as Bhau Dalal and Shivshankar Ninave were denied. The first respondent, however, admitted that Bhau Dalal was only authorised to purchase petrol and all the expenses incurred by him had been shown in the return of expenses but denied that Kharabe, Parashram Waghaya and Ramaji Gaidhane were actively carrying on a systematic election campaign and propaganda on his behalf or that they incurred expenditure on various items with his companysent and authority or with the companysent of his election agent Bhole.