CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 1386 of 1972. From the Judgment and order dated the 26th October, 1971 of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court at Srinagar in Writ Petition No. 36 of 1970. S. Nariman, Additional Solicitor General of India, 0. Mathur and P. C Bhartari, for the appellant. R. Bhasin, R. L. Kohli and Ramesh Kohli, for respondent No. 1 The Judgment of the Court was delivered by KRISHNA IYER, J.-The University of Kashmir, the appellant, with a blurred sense of legality, issued a ukase by resolution of its Council, terminating the services of its Professor, the appellee, insufficiently aware of the kaleidoscopic legislative changes and crucial statutory companysequences on the one hand and curiously indifferent to its own embarrassingly ambivalent dealings seemingly legitimising the permanent status of the Professor. This decision virtually dismissing the appellee was successfully challenged as void in the High, Court, but the appellant University has companye up in appeal, with a certificate of fitness, seeking to sustain the validity of its action. At the first blush, the law of master and servant may apply to the present fact-situation bum the statutory status of the employer substantially transforms tile character of the master, the companysequences of its ultra vires acts as well as amenability to types of relief like reinstatement and the applicability or writ remedies, alien to the legal chemistry of breaches of companytract. However, in the light of the factual-cum-legal companyclusions which appeal to us these thorny jurisprudential issues of deeper import in a socio- economic and cultural companytext where the State undertakes dynamic activities affecting citizens rights and operates through companyporate and other effective instrumentalities may number fall for direct, decision. Enough unto the day is the evil thereof. A chronological narration of the principal facts and events and legislative shifts and their implications must precede companysideration of the legal companytentions put forward by either side. The Jammu and Kashmir University Act, 2005  Samvat Year  created the University of Jammu and Kashmir. Several years later, the present respondent joined the University as a lecturer on companytract basis, the law that governed his services being the provisions of that Act and the statutes framed thereunder. Subsequently, the Jammu and Kashmir University Act, 1965, was passed which, while repealing the previous Act, preserved and companytinued for the transitional period the rules and regulations and services of teachers and officers of the University  s. 52 . Primarily, the 1965 Act imparted embryonic shape to the Jammu University and the Kashmir University by the creation of two Divisions.  1  Jammu Division, and  2  Kashmir Division- Anyway, the respondent who had joined in 1963 was appointed as Reader in September 1965, a few months after the 1965 Act came into force. A companyple of years later the respondent registered an advance in hiscareer and became Professor in the Post- Graduate Departmentof the University in the Kashmir Division on terms and companyditionscontained in letter dated January 8, 1968. While he was put on probation for one year he was informed that immediately after his appointment he would have to enter into an agreement with the University in the form forwarded to him. This agreemcnt bound the respondent to the statutes and regulations from time to time in force in the University. It is significant to numbere, as the High Court has pointed out in its judgment, that the case of both the parties, however, is that the appointment of the petitioner as Professor was on companytract basis. The one- year period of probation expired on December 14. 1968, but the Vice-Chancellor extended it .for one more year by order dated November 11, 1968. This extension was companyfirmed by the meeting of the Central Council of the Unversity at its meeting dated June 26, 1969. But at the same meeting it was resolved by the Central Council that the respondent be charge-sheeted for certain alleged misconduct. An enquiry was held by an enquiry officer appointed in this behalf, Shri J. N. Bhan, who submitted his report on September 5, 1969 holding the respondent guilty substantially. By accident it happens that on the same date, namely, September 5, 1969, the Jammu and Kashmir University Ordiinance, 1969, was promulgated by the Governor establishing two separate universities, one for Jammu and the other for Kashmir. How- ever, by s. 52 thereof, the rules an regulations and services of employees were companytinued. And then followed a significant provision which laid down that within 60 days from the companymencement of the Ordinance the services of teachers employed on companytract basis were to cease unless otherwise ordered by the Chancellor. No such order was issued by the Chancellor extending the respondents employment. However, oblivious or heedless of the statutory cessation of the respondents services he was allowed to function as Professor and his probation was again extended for a year by the Vice-Chancellor under s. 13 4  of the Ordinance  which had already been replaced on November 10, 1969 by the Jammu and Kashmir Universities Act, 1969 . More incongruous with the appellants present stand is the direction by the Vice-Ciiancellor to release the salary of the respondent and the request to him to serve on the Academic Council as an ex-officio member, being Professor and Head of the Department of History. While, thus, on the one side quiet flowed the stream of service as professor, on the other turbid eddies of threat to terminate surfaced up. For, based on the enquiry report the Vice- Chancellor issued a show-cause numberice on December 22, 1969, which elicited the respondents explanation on January 31, 1970. Together, all the materials were companysidered by the University Council at its meeting dated. July 7, 1970, where the decision was taken to remove him paying one months salary. Thereafter, of companyrse, the present litigation started. The principal questions canvassed before us turn on the companyrectness of the views taken by the High Court on  a  the respondents right to companytinue in service even after the statutory explanation thereof, and  b  the validity of the reliance on the enquiry report in the termination order and the breach of statutory companyditions subject to which alone the power of terminating the relationship companyld be exercised by the University Council. In the opinion of the High Court, the facts and circumstances of the case clearly enabled the spelling out of a fresh appointment of the respondent as, Professor and Head of the Department of History of the new University- of Kashmir by an implied companytract. Once this position is reached it follows logically that the termination has to be in terms of the statutory regulations. On the aspect of the case the Court took the view that the enquiry directed under the 1965 Act lapsed when the 1969 Ordinance and the Act came into force, and companyld number furnish the basis for punitive action against the respondent. The irresistible companyclusion the Court therefore reached was that the order of dismissal passed by the University Council being based on the report of the Enquiry Officer was bad in law. The Court directed reinstatement by a writ of mandamus. The learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing for the appellant University, built an argument the companyner-stone of which was that there was a statutory cessation of the companytractual service of the respondent by operation of s. 52 4  of the Ordinance and the Act of 1969. The statutes under the Act of 1965 companytained a provision which ran thus Procedure companyditions for appointment of University Teachers. STATUTES 1. Every salaried teacher of the University shall have to execute a written companytract with the University. The companyditions of service of teachers appointed by the University shall be those embodied in the Agreement of service an- nexed hereto or, on Agreement substantially to like effect, and every teacher shall execute the Agreement before he enters upon his duties or as soon as possible, thereafter. It is also companymon case that respondents employment was on a companytractual basis. By s.