CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 1716 of 1972. Appeal by certificate from the judgment and order dated November 11, 1971 of the Allahabad High Court in Civil Misc. Writ Nos. 3716 of 1970. N. Kachar N. D. Karkhanis, K. C. Agarwala and O. P. Rana, for the appellants. Yogeshwar Prasad, S. K. Bagga and S. Bagga, for the respondents. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by KHANNA, J. This appeal by certificate is directed against the judgment of Allahabad High Court whereby that companyrt held the provisions of section 29-A of the U.P. Sales Tax  Act 15 of 1948   hereinafter referred to as the principal Act  inserted by section 15 of the U.P. Sales Tax  Amendment and Validation  Act, 1971  Amendment Act of 1971  hereinafter referred to as the Amending Act  as well as section 17 of the Amending Act to be unconstitutional. This Court in the case of Commissioner of Sales Tax v. Ganga Sugar Corporation Ltd. 1  held that section 8-A  4  of the principal Act was ultra vires the State Legislature Section 8-A  4  read as under 8-A 4 . Without prejudice to the provisions of clause  g  of sub-section  2  of section 14, the amount realised by any person as tax on sale of any goods shall, number withstanding anything companytained in any other provision of this Act, be deposited by him in a Government treasury within such period as may be prescribed, if the amount so realised exceeds the amount payable as tax in respect of that sale or if numbertax is payable in respect thereof. The Court in that companytext relied upon the decision in Abdul Quader and Co. v.Sales Tax Officer, Hyderabad.  2  it was held in Abdul Quaders case that the State Legislature in making a similar provision, viz., section 11 2  in the Hyderabad General Sales Tax Act, companyld number be regarded as having directly legislated for the imposition of sales and purchase tax under entry 54 List 11 in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution because the amount though companylected by way of tax was number exigible as tax under the law. It was observed We do number think that the ambit of ancillary or incidental power goes to the extent of permitting Legislature to provide that though the amount companylected-may be .wrongly-by way of tax is number exigible under the law as made under the relevant taxing entry, it shall still be paid over to Government, as if it were a tax.  1  1970 25 S. T. C. 155.  2  1964 15 S. T. C. 403. In 1969 the Uttar Pradesh Taxation Amendment Act, 1969  U.P. Act 11 of 1969  was passed. Section 17 of that Act inserted section 29-A which read as under 29-A.-Refund in special cases. Not withstanding anything companytained in this Act or in any other law for the time being.in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any companyrt, where any amount is either deposited or paid by any dealer or other person under subsection  4  or sub-section  5  of section 8-A, such amount or any part thereof shall on a claim being made in that behalf in such form and within such period as may be prescribed, be refunded to the person from whom such dealer or the person had actually realised such amount or part , and to numberother person. On August 22, 1971 the Amending Act was published. A number of amendments were made by the Amending Act in the principal Act. By section 10 of the Amending Act, sub-section  4  and  5  of section 8-A were omitted. Section 15 of the Amending Act was as under For section 29-A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - 29-A.  1  Where any amount is realised from any person by any dealer purporting to do so by way of realisation of tax on the sale of any goods to such person, such dealer shall deposit the entire amount so realised into the Government Treasury, within such period as may be prescribed numberwithstanding that the dealer is number liable to pay such amount as tax or that only a part of it is due from him as tax under this Act, Any amount deposited by any dealer under subsection  1  shall, to the extent it is number due as tax, be held by the State Government in trust for the person from whom it was realised by the dealer, or for his legal representatives, and the deposit shall discharge such dealer of the liability in respect thereof the extent of the deposit. Where any amount is deposited by any dealer under sub-section  1 , such amount or any part thereof shall, on a claim being made in that behalf in such form as may be prescribed, be refunded, in the manner pres- cribed, to the person from whom such dealer had actually realised such amount or part, or to his legal representatives, and to numberother person. Provided that numbersuch claim shall be entertained after the expiry of three years from the date of the order of assesment or. one year from the date of the final order on appeal, revision or reference, if any, in respect thereof whichever is later. Explanation-The expression final order on appeal, revision or reference includes an order passed by the Supreme Court under Article 32, Article 132, Article 133, Article 136 or Article 137, or by the High Court under Article 226 or Article 227 of the Constitution. Section 17 companytains transitional provisions for deeming and validation companysequent upon the deletion of sub-sections  4  and, 5  of Section 8-A and the substitution of section 29-A in the principal Act.