ORIGINAL JURISDICTION Writ Petition No. 1977 of 1973. Under Art. 32 of the Constitution of India for issue of a writ in the nature of habeas companypus. N. Mukherjee and M. M. Kshatriya, for the petitioner. K. Chatterjee and G. S. Chatterjee, for the respondents. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by KRISHNA IYER, J.-A few issues of some moment, in the companytext of civil liberties have been argued in this application for habeas companypus by Shri Mukherjee as amicus curiae. The facts are disquieting at least for the reason that the petitioner an aged ailing man around 74, has been under detention since 1973 and, previous to it, had been facing a criminal prosecution which ended in a discharge on the date the detention order was clamped down on him and companynsel pressed the poignant circumstance that the ultimate order of Government dated September 28, 1973 merely companyfirms the detention, being unlimited in duration and unspeaking on the terminus ad quem for the incarceration. The relevant facts may be stated before discussing the highlights ,of the arguments. The Commissioner of Police, Calcutta, passed the initial order of detention dated July 19, 1973 on the petitioner, Golam Hussain alias Gama, under S. 3 1   a   ii  read with sub-section  2  of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971  Act 26 of 1971   hereinafter referred to as the Act . The grounds which induced the detaining authority to pass the order were companymunicated the same day. They have been set out by the State as annexure to the affidavit filed in opposition to the petition and read thus On 8-10-72 at about 22-25 hrs., you along with your associates Achche Lal Show of 1, Manickotolla Bazar Lane, Satya Narayan Jaiswal of 123/2, Acharya Prafulla in Chandra Road, and others, all being armed with bombs, soda- water bottles created a great disturbance of public order on Gouri Sankar Lane in front of premises No. 8 by hurling bombs indiscriminately with a view to attack one Jiban Paul of 8. Gouri Shankar Lane and his group in retaliation to an earlier quarrel that took place with the said Jiban Paul at 8, Gouri Sankar Lane with your associates Satya Narayan Jaiswal and others. The incident terrorised the locality and threw out of gear the numbermal life stream of the residents of the said locality amounting to police orde r. On 9-11-72 sometimes between 04-45 hrs. you along with your associates Ratish Pradhan alias Laltu of 23/lA, Abinash Kaviraj St., Benode Kr. Jaiswal of 34B, Gulu Ostagar Lane and other all being armed with brickbats, soda-water bottles, bombs poles, created a great disturbance of public order on Gouri Sankar Lane and Abinash Kaviraj Street by hurling soda-water bottles, brickbats indiscriminately with a view to overawe the organisers of the Kalipuja that took place in front of 8 Gowi Sankar Lane and thereby to terrorise the locality. As a result the lights of the above pujab pandals were damaged. This was in sequel to an incident that took place earlier at about 04-30 hrs when your associates Benode Kumar and others threw beer bottles at the Kalipuja pandal at 8, Gouri Sankar Lane, where some females were then dancing, which was then protested by the local people and the organisers of the said puja. And if left free and unfettered you are likely to companytinue to disturb manitenance of public order by acting in a similar manner as aforesaid. As required by the statute, the fact of detention was companymunicated to the State Government which in turn reported to the Central Government. The case was placed before the Advisory Board on August 13, 1973 and when the representation of the detenu was, received it was duly companysidered and negatived by the State Government which thereafter made it over to the Advisory Board. After adverting to the facts, the Board advised companytinuance of the detention on September 21, 1973. The companysequential order companyfirming the detention was made by the State Government on September 28, 1973 and companymunicated to the detenu by the middle of October, 1973. We see numberstatutory shortcoming in the time sequence set out above. But other grounds of attack have been levelled against the order which deserve a closer look. Shri Mukherjee urged that although two criminal cases were started in companynection with the two incidents companystituting the grounds for the detention, the petitioners name was number even mentioned in the first information reports, and he was produced before the Magistrate only on July 5, 1973, and so the order based on those accusations was too irrational to be bona fide. The Commissioner of Police who passed the detention order has stated in his affidavit that there were cases companynected with ,he incidents of October 8th and November 9th, but the detenu companyld number be arrested until July 4, 1973. It is number denied that the petitioners name was number in the first information report, but he was apprehended later on the basis of evidence gathered during the investigation of the criminal case. The companymissioner admits that the detenu was discharged by the, Court as numberwitness dared to depose against the detenu in open companyrt. According to him the said order of discharge was made on the prayer of the police on July 19, 1973, and thereafter the petitioner was Preventively detained. Could such an order be castigated as malafide and oblique resort to the inscrutable order of detention when the prospects in the criminal case became bleak ? This charge has been repudiated by the Commissioner on oath and we are number able to hold with the petitioner that merely because the detaining authority has chosen to pass the order on the discharge of the petitioner by the companyrt for want of evidence, the order is bad in law. , The branch of jurisprudence bearing on prohibitory detention has been crystallised by number and it is numberlonger a valid companytention, that because the accused has been discharged in a criminal case the ground of charge cannot be relied upon by the appropriate authority for passing an order of detention. The former relates to the punitive branch of the criminal law and relates to the past companymission, the latter to the preventive branch of social defence and protects the companymunity from future injury. Whether we like it or number, this branch of jurisprudence, as interpreted by this Court has made it futile for a detenu to urge that because the grounds of detention have been the subject matter of criminal cases which have ended in discharge, therefore, the order of detention is malafide. The basic imperative of proof beyond reasonable doubt does number apply to the subjective satisfaction companyponent, of imprisonment for reasons of internal security. To quarrel with such a proposition is to challenge the wisdom of Parliament. Of companyrse, we can visualise extreme cases where a companyrt has held a criminal case to be false and a detaining Authority with that judicial pronouncement before him may number reasonably claim to be satisfied about prospective prejudicial activities based on what a companyrt has found to be baseless. But the present case where the order of discharge is made purely for want of evidence on the score that witnesses were too afraid to depose against a desperate character cannot companye under this exceptional category. Another submission, equally an exercise in futility, made before us is that there has been a long interval of nine months between the criminal incidents of October and November, 1972 and the detention order of July, 1973. Counsel hopefully relied on recent decision of this Court in Lakshman Khatik v. State of West Bengal  1  and an earlier decision in Rameshwar Shah v. District Magistrate Burdwan 2 . It is true that there must be a live link between the grounds of criminal activity alleged by the detaining authority and the purpose of detention, namely, inhibition of prejudicial activity of the species specified in the statute. This credible chain is snapped if there is too long and unexplained an interval between the Offending acts and the order of detention. Such is the ratio of proximity in Lakshman Khatik l . No authority, acting rationally, can be satisfied, subjectively or otherwise, of future mischief merely because long ago the detenu had Writ Petit Judgment on 26-2-74.  2  1964 4 S.C.R. 921. done something evil. To rule otherwise is to sanction a simulacrum of a statutory requirement. But numbermechanical test by companynting the months of the interval is sound. It all depends on the nature of the acts relied on, grave and determined or less serious and companyrigible, on the length of the gap, short or long on the reason for the delay in taking preventive action, like information of participation being available only in the companyrse of an investigation. We have to investigate whether the causal companynection has been broken in the circumstances of each case. If the detaining authority takes the chance of companyviction and, when the companyrt verdict goes against it, falls back on its detention power to punish one whom the companyrt would number companyvict, it is an abuse and virtual nullification of the judicial process. But if honestly finding a dangerous person getting away with it by overawing witnesses or companycealing the companymission cleverly an authority thinks on the material before him that there is likelihood of and need to interdict public disorder at his instance he may validly direct detention. The distinction is fine but real. In the present case, the acts ere serious, being bomb hurling and brick-bat throwing in public places creating. panic. The involvement of the petitioner is discovered only during the investigation of the offences. The witnesses are scared away from deposing. The Commissioner swears that in these special circumstances he did form the satisfaction requisite for ordering preventive detention, No ground exists for dismissing this statement as sham or factitious. It is one thing to say that a more subjective satisfaction is sufficient to deprive a person of a fundamental freedom. it is another to reject that satisfaction as specious and number- existent. Parliament makes the law and is responsible for it the companyrt only applies it, as it must. We have, therefore, to reject the plea that because the criminal case has failed the detention must be bad. M. S. Khan v. C. C. Bose,  1  Ashim Kumar v. State of West Bengal 2 , and Sahib Singh Dugal v. Union of India 3  are but three among many cases taking this view. We follow these precedents. The next serious companytention of Shri Chatterjee is that an order of detention which does number specify a period is violative of s. 12 of the Act. We may reproduce the relevant provisions which are of ancient vintage, being wholly or substantially in pari materia with earlier companyresponding preventive detention sections. Nor is the position of law can vassed for res integra. Section l2 and l3 of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971, as amended, read as follows 12 1 ln any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for the detention of a person, the appropriate Government may companyfirm the detention order and companytinue the detention of the person companycerned for such period as it thinks fit.  2  A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 1670. A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 2561.  3  1966 1 S.C.R. 313.